<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Historical Evidence for the Virgin Birth</title>
      <author><name reg="Taylor, Vincent">Vincent Taylor</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>June 6, 2017</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">54858</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
        most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
        whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
        the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
        www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
        to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2017-06-06">June 6, 2017</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by deaurider, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Historical Evidence for the Virgin Birth</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">by Vincent Taylor, B.D. (Lond.)</p>

      <p rend="text-align: center">Clarendon Press</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1920</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
</div>

<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
This book is intended to be a literary and critical examination
of the historical evidence for the Virgin Birth. It is not the
writer's desire to discuss the evidence from the point of view of
an advocate; with a view, that is to say, of obtaining an uncompromising
verdict. His aim is rather to trace and to define the
earliest Christian tradition upon the subject, and to show the
limits and the bearings of the historical question.
</p>

<p>
A limited aim such as this ought not to require much justification.
If, however, justification is needed, it is not far to seek.
</p>

<p>
Much of the literature which treats of the Virgin Birth is
controversial in point of origin if not in form, and, in the nature
of the case, it could not have been otherwise. Controversial
literature has, of course, a necessary place in the search for truth.
Nevertheless, it is exposed to serious perils, especially when such
a subject as that of the Virgin Birth is discussed. It is not
always easy, for example, to avoid an arbitrary treatment of the
New Testament, and to prevent philosophic or dogmatic presuppositions
from determining purely critical questions. Few
will deny that the discussion of the Virgin Birth has suffered in
these directions, and that, as a consequence, the problem remains
in considerable confusion. Not only has the evidence been
variously estimated, but there are the widest differences of
opinion as to what the evidence really is. Neither side has
succeeded in convincing the other, and very many students of
the question preserve an attitude of suspended judgement.
</p>

<p>
The point which it is important to make is that, if any escape
is to be made from the present impasse, the problem must be
approached in another way. Doctrinal presuppositions must be
resolutely laid aside; there must be a common desire to ascertain
the true facts of the evidence, whatever the results may be.
Not that dogmatic considerations have no place in the problem!
It is part of the conclusion reached in this book that in the end
<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
dogmatic considerations do determine the issue. But it must be
<q>in the end</q>; not at the beginning, nor in the middle.
</p>

<p>
It may be that the writer has not himself escaped the perils to
which he has referred. He can only say that no pains have been
spared to achieve this purpose. It is true that the problem has
been faced with a conviction that, while truly man, Jesus was
much more than man as we know him to be. But this is not
a presupposition which colours the evidence. On the contrary,
it is the one point of view which recognizes that there is a problem
to be solved. If our Lord was a prophet, and no more, there is
no real difficulty; no one would defend the Virgin Birth upon
such terms. The question becomes a living issue only when
Jesus is believed to be more than man.
</p>

<p>
In Chapter I the New Testament evidence outside the First
and Third Gospels is discussed. On the question of the attitude
of the Fourth Evangelist to the Virgin Birth&mdash;a question as
difficult as it is interesting&mdash;the writer has been glad to accept
and to work out a striking suggestion made by Dr. E. F. Scott
(<hi rend='italic'>The Fourth Gospel, its Purpose and Theology</hi>).
</p>

<p>
One reason for allotting three chapters to the Third Gospel
is the complexity of the Lukan problem. The theory which is
outlined in Chapter IV is one which has not yet received sufficient
consideration. The alternative, in the opinion of the writer, is to
regard the Miraculous Conception as a <q>necessary stone in the
structure</q> of Lk. i, ii. It is the difficulties mentioned in
Chapter II which have prevented him from taking this view.
The writer is convinced that St. Luke believed and taught the
Virgin Birth. Nevertheless, the critical difficulties are such that
it has not been found possible to accept this view in the form in
which it is generally held.
</p>

<p>
It is well to remember that he who states a theory in connexion
with such problems contributes to their solution, whether
his theory stands the test of time or not. Even in the case of
failure the possibilities are reduced and a by-path is revealed as
such. As an illustration of this, reference may be made to the
view which ascribes the Virgin Birth tradition in Lk. i, ii to an
unknown and later writer.
</p>

<p>
One chapter (Chapter V) has been assigned to the First
Gospel. The exposition there given is one which is widely held
<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>
in this country, but an attempt has been made to emphasize the
unique character of the Evangelist's standpoint, which, it is
believed, is the key to the textual problem of Mt. i. 16.
The textual problem is treated in an Appendix to the chapter.
</p>

<p>
It may seem strange that in Chapter VI no decided opinion is
expressed for or against the Virgin Birth. The justification for
this position is the fact that, in the end, the question becomes one
of Theology, and that to attack the theological problem would
be to go beyond the limited aim which the present work has
in view.
</p>

<p>
One result of the investigation is that the documentary evidence
for the Virgin Birth is found to be earlier than <q>negative</q> criticism
has allowed. But to accept this conclusion is only to be brought
face to face with the question which the modern New Testament
student cannot escape. <q>Whence come the sources upon which
the Evangelists drew?</q> At first sight the problem seems hopeless.
To recover and to describe with objectivity of statement
the several sources which the Evangelists employed is
a task beset with difficulties: to penetrate still further might
well seem impossible. If, however, the problem is faced bravely,
with an open mind and an eagerness to learn, it may be that as
time passes there will be cause to rejoice over real progress made.
The journey is not the plunge into the dark which it might be
thought to be. If, indeed, it will bring men nearer to the Jesus
of history, it is a quest which cannot be refused, however great
the difficulties may be.
</p>

<p>
In a subject such as this, certain things have necessarily to be
taken for granted. The author of the First Gospel is regarded
as unknown; accordingly, he is spoken of as the First Evangelist
or as St. <q>Matthew</q>. The writer of the Fourth Gospel is also
referred to as the Fourth Evangelist, the question of authorship
being left open. St. Mark and St. Luke, the companions of
St. Paul, are assumed to be the authors of the Second and Third
Gospels respectively; St. Luke is also believed to be the author
of the Acts. The reader who does not accept these views may
mentally substitute such phrases as the Second and Third
Evangelists wherever St. Mark and St. Luke are mentioned. Such
abbreviations as Mt., Mk., Lk., Jn. are always meant to refer
to the Gospels, not to their authors.
</p>

<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>

<p>
It only remains for the writer to express his deep sense of
gratitude to those to whose knowledge and help he is debtor.
How much he owes to earlier workers in the field will be
sufficiently evident. It has proved by no means an easy task to
weigh and to differentiate between opposing views, and the
writer is not unmindful of his temerity, in certain places, in
dissenting from opinions supported by justly honoured names.
</p>

<p>
He desires particularly to speak of the generous encouragement
he received in his task from the late Dr. Sanday. Dr. Sanday
had made a provisional promise to write a brief introduction to
the present work. His lamented death has prevented the carrying
out of this promise, and for the lack of such an introduction
the book is so much the poorer.
</p>

<p>
The writer further wishes to express his gratitude to his
former tutor, the Rev. Prof. A. S. Geden, M.A., D.D., and to the
Rev. J. Walthew Simister, for their kindness in reading the typescript,
and in suggesting improvements, and also to the Rev. Prof.
F. Bertram Clogg, M.A., for his valued assistance in the reading
of the proof-sheets.
</p>

<p>
Vincent Taylor.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bath</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>September, 1920</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Abbreviations</head>

<p>
DCG.            Hastings's <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels</hi>
(1906-8).
</p>

<p>
EB.             <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi> (1899-1903).
</p>

<p>
Evan. Da-Meph.  F. C. Burkitt's <hi rend='italic'>Evangelion Da-Mepharreshe</hi> (1904).
</p>

<p>
GHD.            V. H. Stanton's <hi rend='italic'>The Gospels as Historical Documents</hi>,
Parts I and II (1903-9).
</p>

<p>
GHT.            F. C. Burkitt's <hi rend='italic'>The Gospel History and its Transmission</hi>
(1906).
</p>

<p>
Gr. ii.         J. H. Moulton's <hi rend='italic'>Grammar of New Testament Greek</hi>,
Vol. II (1919).
</p>

<p>
HDB.            Hastings's <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Bible</hi> (1898-1904).
</p>

<p>
HJ.             <hi rend='italic'>The Hibbert Journal.</hi>
</p>

<p>
HS.             <hi rend='italic'>Horae Synopticae</hi>, Sir John C. Hawkins (2nd ed.,
1909).
</p>

<p>
ICC.            <hi rend='italic'>The International Critical Commentary.</hi>
</p>

<p>
INT.            Jülicher's <hi rend='italic'>Introduction to the New Testament</hi>, Eng.
Tr. (1904); J. Moffatt's <hi rend='italic'>An Introduction to the
Literature of the New Testament</hi> (3rd ed., 1918).
</p>

<p>
Proleg.         Vol. I of J. H. Moulton's <hi rend='italic'>Grammar of New Testament
Greek</hi> (3rd ed., 1908).
</p>

<p>
SH.             Sanday and Headlam's Commentary on <hi rend='italic'>The Epistle
to the Romans</hi> (ICC., 1895).
</p>

<p>
Th-Gr.          Thayer-Grimm's <hi rend='italic'>Greek-English Lexicon of the New
Testament</hi> (1905).
</p>

<p>
VGT.            Moulton and Milligan's <hi rend='italic'>The Vocabulary of the
Greek Testament</hi>, Parts I to III (1914-18).
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Virgin Birth And The New Testament
Outside The First And Third Gospels</head>

<p>
Outside the First and Third Gospels there is no direct
reference to the Virgin Birth in the New Testament. There
are passages which have been said to imply a knowledge of the
doctrine, but, for particularity of statement, none of them can be
compared with Mt. i. 18-25 and Lk. i. 34 f. This fact must be
our justification in the present chapter for treating together the
New Testament Books outside these two Gospels.
</p>

<p>
The inquiry is mainly a study in silence; it is for that reason
both difficult and complicated.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Sanday has expressed considerable distrust in the argument
from silence (cf. <hi rend='italic'>The Criticism, of the Fourth Gospel</hi>,
pp. 33-41). He quotes a striking passage from Dr. Drummond's
<hi rend='italic'>Character and Authorship of the Fourth Gospel</hi> (p. 157 f.), in
which reference is made to Theophilus of Antioch, who, in
a defence of Christianity, relates nothing about Christ Himself,
and maintains a remarkable silence concerning the Gospels.
The quotation ends with the words: <q>We may learn from these
curious facts that it is not correct to say that a writer knows
nothing of certain things, simply because he had not occasion to
refer to them in his only extant writing: or even because he
does not mention them when his subject would seem naturally to
lead him to do so.</q> Dr. Sanday has two main objections to the
way in which the argument from silence is often handled.
</p>

<p>
<q>(1) The critic does not ask himself <emph>what</emph> is silent&mdash;what extent
of material.... And (2) experience shows that the argument is
often most fallacious</q> (op. cit., p. 35).
</p>

<p>
Nothing can be lost in considering this opinion at the outset
of our inquiry. In the connexion in which it is urged, it has
very great justification. Dr. Sanday is referring to the paucity
of references to the Gospels in the second century previous to
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> The real question is, he says, <q>What is the relation
which the extant evidence bears to the whole body of that which
once existed, and how far can we trust the inferences drawn from
it?</q> The available literature is confessedly small. <q>If we take
the whole extant Christian literature between the years 130 and
170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, it would not fill more than a thin octavo volume, and
by far the greater part of that is taken up with external controversy</q>
(ib., p. 39).
</p>

<p>
The caution suggested by these words is distinctly healthy.
It may be questioned, however, whether Dr. Sanday's point of
view would apply quite so well as regards the alleged silence
of so many New Testament Books with reference to the Virgin
Birth. There are good reasons for this opinion.
</p>

<p>
(1) The existing New Testament Writings represent the best
Christian literature of the period which they cover. No one
would compare them in this respect with the extant works of the
first seven decades of the second century.
</p>

<p>
(2) While not exhaustive in their treatment, the Gospels are
faithful to the outstanding events in the life of Jesus.
</p>

<p>
(3) The Epistles are rich in doctrinal teaching. Occasional in
point of origin, they impinge again and again upon the great
doctrines of the Christian Faith. The Incarnation and the Person
of Christ especially are central.
</p>

<p>
If, then, very many New Testament Writings are found to be
silent as regards the Virgin Birth, the silence is not one which
can be ignored. It may in part be explained, but it must not be
explained away. If it exists, it is not a silence which can
be regarded with equanimity; it must be significant, and no
pains can be spared in trying to understand that significance.
</p>

<p>
We believe, then, that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>argumentum ex silentio</foreign> has a valid
place in our inquiry. All the more, therefore, must we consider
what the possibilities of silence are. Obviously, silence may be
consistent with knowledge of a fact or lack of knowledge. But
that is not all. If it implies knowledge, it may mean tacit
acceptance of the fact, tacit rejection, or comparative indifference.
Lack of knowledge, on the other hand, may be explained by
special circumstances, or by the view that the alleged fact is
untrue.
</p>

<p>
In treating the New Testament Books outside the First and
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
Third Gospels, our first task must be to determine whether
their silence is complete. Where this is the case, we have to try,
so far as we can, to interpret the silence. Each stage is, however,
a further step into the unknown, and must therefore be
taken with increasing care and caution.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. St. Paul</head>

<p>
We begin with <hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Paul</hi>, the earliest New Testament writer,
and the author of ten, if not thirteen, Epistles. Several passages
have been quoted from his writings, in support of the view that
the Virgin Birth tradition was known to him. Among these are
Gal. iv. 4, Rom. i. 3, and passages in which St. Paul speaks of
Christ as the Second Adam, notably Rom. v. 12-15 and 1 Cor.
xv. 47.
</p>

<p>
Gal. iv. 4 f. reads as follows: <hi rend='italic'>But when the fulness of the time
came, God sent forth his Son, born of a woman, born under the
law, that he might redeem them which were under the law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons</hi>. It is most improbable
that there is here any reference to the Virgin Birth, or even any
indication that the doctrine is known to St. Paul. The phrase
<q><hi rend='italic'>born of a woman</hi></q> is one that is used naturally of an ordinary
human birth (cf. Job xiv. 1; and Mt. xi. 11 (Lk. vii. 28) <q>among
them that are born of women</q>). The determining consideration
is, however, the argument of Gal. iv. 1-7. St. Paul is there
working out the figure of the heir who is yet a minor (verses
1, 2). While we were children, he argues, we were in bondage
(verse 3). But, when the fulness of the time came, God sent
forth his Son to redeem men from the law. To accomplish this
purpose, the Son must needs make Himself one with those He
came to deliver. Like them He must be <q>born under the law</q>;
like them He must be <q>born of a woman</q>. The one clause asserts
His position as a child of the Jewish race; the other declares the
reality of His humanity. There is not the slightest suggestion
of a miraculous birth.<note place='foot'>Dr. Orr (<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Christ</hi>, 1907, 3rd ed., 1914) says that in
every Pauline reference to the origin of Christ there is <q>some peculiarity of
expression</q> (pp. 117 ff., 196). He instances γενόμενος in Gal. iv. 4, Rom. i. 3,
Phil. ii. 7, and speaks of γεννητός as the word properly denoting <q>born</q>.
But St. Paul never uses γεννητός, and Mt. xi. 11 and Lk. vii. 28 are the only
instances in the NT. Moreover, the papyri show that γίνομαι and γενόμενος
were in common use in the sense of <q>to come into being</q>, <q>be born</q>
(cf. Moulton and Milligan, VGT., 1915, p. 126 a). Canon Box also speaks of
St. Paul's use of <q>the out-of-the-way γενόμενον</q> (<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Jesus</hi>,
1916). <q>This would harmonise</q>, he says, <q>with the feeling that there was
something extraordinary and supernatural about the birth, which led to its
being spoken of in unusual terms</q> (p. 149 n.). Not to speak of the papyri,
what would these writers make of Jn. viii. 58, <q>Before Abraham was (πρὶν
Ἀβραὰμ γενέσθαι) I am</q>? Was there <q>something extraordinary</q> in Abraham's
birth too? For a view similar to that of Orr and Box see Sweet, <hi rend='italic'>The Birth
and Infancy of Jesus Christ</hi>, p. 237 f.</note> Indeed, the more natural impression
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
made by the words is that of a birth common to all the sons of
men. If St. Paul had wished to avoid giving that impression,
he could have done so with ease, since he was perfectly familiar
with the distinction between γυνή (woman) and παρθένος (virgin)
(cf. 1 Cor. vii. 34).
</p>

<p>
Rom. i. 3 f. reads: <q>... <hi rend='italic'>his Son, who was born of the seed of
David according to the flesh, who was declared to be the Son
of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the
resurrection of the dead</hi>.</q> Here the thought of the Virgin Birth
is said to lie implicit in the opening words of the passage
(cf. Orr, <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Christ</hi>, pp. 119 ff.; also Knowling,
<hi rend='italic'>Testimony of St. Paul to Christ</hi>, p. 313; and Sweet, <hi rend='italic'>The Birth
and Infancy of Jesus Christ</hi>, p. 237 n.). Again, the exegesis
cannot be allowed. St. Paul's words state an antithesis; they
speak of the Son from two standpoints, that of the body and
that of the spirit (SH., Rom., p. 7). <q>According to the flesh</q>,
He was <q>born (γενομένον) of the seed of David</q>, but, <q>according
to the spirit of holiness</q>, He was designated (ὁρισθέντος) Son of
God <q>by the resurrection of the dead</q>. It is very difficult to
think that the antithesis would have been stated in this way, if
the Apostle had been thinking of the Virgin Birth. <q>Born of the
seed of David</q> contains no reference to the doctrine. The
Divine Sonship, indeed, is not mentioned until the following
clause, and there it is said to be predicated, not in the Virgin
Birth, but in the Resurrection. Without pressing the view that
<q>according to the flesh born of the seed of David</q> implies an
ordinary human birth, we may certainly claim that the Miraculous
Conception is a thought entirely foreign to the passage.
</p>

<p>
A further implication of the doctrine has been found in
St. Paul's thought of <hi rend='italic'>the Second Adam</hi> (Rom. v. 12-21, 1 Cor.
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
xv. 44-9). In <hi rend='italic'>Dissertations</hi> (new ed., p. 11), Dr. Gore writes:
<q>What we can maintain, with great boldness, is that St. Paul's
conception of the <q>Second Adam</q> postulates His miraculous
birth</q> (cf. Box, <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Jesus</hi>, p. 150). In a
question of this kind, we must distinguish between what the
doctrine of the <q>Second Adam</q> may or may not <q>postulate</q> in
our own minds, and what St. Paul's thoughts may have been.
Certainly he gives us no reason to suppose that the Virgin Birth
was in the background of his mind when he wrote Rom. v. 12-21.<note place='foot'>Compare verse 12, <q>as through one man</q>, with verse 15, <q>the grace of
the one man, Jesus Christ</q>. Cf. also Rom. ix. 5 (and 1 Tim. ii. 5).</note>
There would be as much justification, if not more, for the
contrary suggestion. So far as 1 Cor. xv. 44-9 is concerned&mdash;(verse
47 reads: <q><hi rend='italic'>The second man is of heaven</hi></q>)&mdash;the reference
is to the Resurrection, not the Incarnation.<note place='foot'>Cf. H. R. Mackintosh, <hi rend='italic'>The Person of Jesus Christ</hi>, p. 69: <q>... the passage
[1 Cor. xv. 44-9] is throughout concerned not in the least with the pre-existent
but with the exalted Christ. It was only in virtue of resurrection
that He became the archetype and head of a new race.</q> Mackintosh says
that the Virgin Birth is <q>not present</q> in Gal. iv. 4, <q>not even hinted at</q>
(p. 528).</note>
</p>

<p>
None of these passages is sufficient to show that St. Paul was
acquainted with the Virgin Birth tradition, nor can any others be
cited. This fact is the more remarkable when we call to mind
the great Pauline passages which bear upon the Incarnation.
With the closest scrutiny, not one of them gives us reason to
think that the Apostle knew of the Virgin Birth. This is true
of the great Christological passage of Phil. ii. 5-11, and also of
the well-known words of 2 Cor. viii. 9. Most significant in
this connexion are Phil. ii. 7 (<q><hi rend='italic'>Being made in the likeness of
man</hi></q>) and Rom. viii. 3 (which speaks of the Son as sent <q><hi rend='italic'>in the
likeness of sinful flesh</hi></q>). These passages are important because
they clearly imply a difference between the humanity of Christ
and ordinary humanity. This difference&mdash;indicated by the word
<q>likeness</q> (ὁμοίωμα)&mdash;is certainly not a difference in mode of
origin. Its character is manifest in Rom. viii. 3; it lies in the
sinlessness and moral perfection of Jesus.<note place='foot'><q>The flesh of Christ is <q>like</q> ours inasmuch as it is flesh; <q>like</q>, and
only <q>like</q>, because it is not sinful: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ostendit nos quidem habere carnem
peccati, Filium vero Dei similitudinem habuisse carnis peccati, non carnem
peccati</foreign> (Orig.-lat.)</q> (SH., ICC., Rom., p. 193).</note> There is no indication
that the Apostle is thinking of anything further, and the
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
same is true of Phil. ii. 7. Viewing the passages as a whole, we
must conclude that, not only is St. Paul completely silent as to the
Virgin Birth, but that he is silent just where his silence is most
difficult to understand, if he knew of the tradition.
</p>

<p>
Can we go further, and say that St. Paul did not know of the
doctrine? Short of a hard and fast conclusion, we are at liberty
to state what would seem to be the probabilities of the case;
and as regards these we can have little hesitation. It is reasonable
to urge that St. Paul would have phrased his references to
the Incarnation somewhat differently, if he had known of the
Virgin Birth, and that, on the whole, his words are best explained
by presuming his ignorance of the tradition.
</p>

<p>
W. C. Allen has suggested that St. Paul's silence may have
been due to reasons of prudence. He may have thought that
the tradition would prove <q>a great stumbling-block to the progress
of Christianity, and a continual source of wounded feeling
for the reverence of Christians for the Person of their Master</q>
(ICC., St. Mt., p. 20). It is possible that this argument might go
some way to explain the absence of direct allusions to the Virgin
Birth in St. Paul's writings. It might cover his failure to employ
the tradition as <q>an argument for Christianity in his preaching to
the Gentiles</q>. But, assuredly, the theory is stretched to breaking-point,
if it is made to cover the absence of the slightest indication
that the doctrine was present to St. Paul's mind. For
the most part, St. Paul's Epistles were not public manifestoes,
but private letters, written to Christian communities. Moreover,
they are intensely self-revealing. They permit us to appreciate
how much St. Paul knew of the words and deeds of Jesus, and of
the events of His earthly life. That they reveal no knowledge
of the Virgin Birth is hardly to be explained by a policy of
silence. Unless, on other grounds, it can be shown that the
tradition was known in Apostolic circles during St. Paul's lifetime,
his silence must be interpreted to mean lack of knowledge
concerning it.
</p>

<p>
This conclusion, if established, would not, of course, be fatal
to the historical value of the Virgin Birth tradition. Special
reasons might be forthcoming to account for the later spread of
the belief. The importance of St. Paul's silence is that it
furnishes help in deciding when the belief became current.
</p>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<p>
A further inference, of considerable theological importance, is
that the Apostle could build up a mature and consistent
Christology, without any reference to, and apparently, thought
of the Miraculous Conception.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Q</head>

<p>
Q (Quelle, <q>source</q>) is the symbol used to denote the main
documentary source, upon which the First and Third Evangelists
drew, in addition to St. Mark's Gospel. As regards its character,
there is difference of opinion. Some scholars identify it with the
Matthaean Logia of which Papias speaks; others regard the
latter as an independent collection of Messianic proof-texts. By
some it is thought to have been a Gospel; by others it is looked
upon as a collection of the Sayings of Jesus, with a certain
element of narrative. Wellhausen dates it later than Mk., but
most scholars think that it is earlier, and date it from the sixties
and in some cases from the fifties.<note place='foot'>For these and other details see Moffatt, INT., pp. 194-206; also
Harnack, <hi rend='italic'>The Sayings of Jesus</hi>, pp. 229-52.</note>
</p>

<p>
As regards the Virgin Birth, it is almost certain that Q did
not contain the tradition. Harnack thinks that Q's narrative of
the Baptism, with its use of Ps. ii. 7, <q>excludes all ideas of pre-existence
and miraculous birth</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sayings of Jesus</hi>, p. 235), and
J. M. Thompson, who quotes this opinion, finds in the Baptist's
question, <q>Art thou he that cometh?</q>,<note place='foot'>Cf. Mt. xi. 2 f. = Lk. vii. 18 f.</note> a passage which it is <q>hard
to reconcile ... with Lk.'s story of the Birth, as generally interpreted</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Miracles</hi>, p. 140). What is more important than either
of these arguments, is the fact that neither the First nor the
Third Evangelist drew a Virgin Birth tradition from Q. The
presumption is that Q was silent as regards the Virgin Birth,<note place='foot'>Cf. Mackintosh, <hi rend='italic'>Person of Jesus Christ</hi>, p. 528.</note> but
in view of the fact that it probably contained only a small element
of narrative, we ought not to say more.<note place='foot'>Mr. Thompson thinks that in Q <q>we are dealing with an age that has not
yet begun to think of the Virgin Birth</q> (ib., p. 140). This may be true, but
it is not a legitimate inference to draw from Q alone.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. St. Mark's Gospel</head>

<p>
In treating <hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Mark's Gospel</hi>, our first task is to ask if its
silence is complete. This leads at once to a discussion of
Mk. vi. 3: <q><hi rend='italic'>Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary...?</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Parentage among the Jews was traced on the father's side.
The passage may therefore imply that Joseph was already dead.
Archdeacon Allen thinks that <q>son of Mary</q> is <q>more naturally
an allusion to the supernatural circumstances of the birth of
Jesus</q> (ICC., St. Mt., p. 156).<note place='foot'>Cf. Plummer, ICC., St. Lk., p. 125.</note> Without going so far as this,
Canon Box thinks that there is something <q>decidedly remarkable
and unusual</q> in the phrase, and suggests that it is probably contemptuous
(op. cit., p. 139).
</p>

<p>
However we explain the phrase, we ought not to interpret
Mk. vi. 3 as implying a knowledge of the Virgin Birth on the
part of the people of Nazareth. Mt. xiii. 55 and Lk. iv. 22
directly exclude this view.<note place='foot'>Mt. xiii. 55: <q>Is not this the carpenter's son?...</q> Lk. iv. 22: <q>Is not
this Joseph's son?</q></note> <q>Who would allude to the miraculous
birth of somebody <emph>as a reason for not believing in him</emph>?</q>
(Thompson, ib., p. 138 n.).
</p>

<p>
But did the Evangelist know of the Virgin Birth? Has
a knowledge of the doctrine shaped his phrasing in Mk. vi. 3?
The question is complicated by critical considerations. It is
suggested by several scholars that the passage, in whole or in
part, is a later addition to the Second Gospel.<note place='foot'>So Wendland and Bacon (Moffatt, INT., p. 227 f.); Stanton, GHD.,
ii. 142. Mt. xiii. 55 reads: <q>Is not this the carpenter's son?</q>, and Lk. iv. 22:
<q>Is not this Joseph's son?</q> The argument is that it is very difficult to think
that the later Evangelists can have read what is now Mk. vi. 3 in the Markan
Source.</note> There is much to
be said for this view, but, so far as our immediate purpose is
concerned, we have no need to discuss it in detail. On either
view&mdash;that of the critical theory just mentioned, or that which
attributes the passage to the Evangelist&mdash;it is improbable that
St. Mark intended to refer to the Virgin Birth, or was influenced
by the doctrine. On the interpolation-hypothesis, this is
obvious enough, but it is also true if Mk. vi. 3 is original. The
suggestions that Joseph was already dead, and that a certain contempt
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
breathes in the words, have great force. We may also
note that the passage goes on to refer to the brothers and sisters
of Jesus, with no suggestion that the relationship was other than
full and complete. But what is most telling of all is the fact
that, if Mk. vi. 3 does imply St. Mark's knowledge of the Virgin
Birth, both St. <q>Matthew</q> and St. Luke, in their own narratives,
have destroyed the reference. This is all the more remarkable
if the First Evangelist's treatment of Mk. vi. 3 is motived by
reverence for the Person of Jesus.<note place='foot'><q>Mt. has substituted <q>the Son of the Carpenter</q> for <q>the Carpenter</q>
from a feeling that the latter was hardly a phrase of due reverence</q> (Allen,
op. cit., p. 155).</note> Finally, can we suppose that
St. Mark would have placed his sole reference to the Virgin
Birth in the lips of unbelieving Jews who speak with thinly
veiled contempt? For these reasons, we find it impossible to
discover in Mk. vi. 3 a reference to the Virgin Birth by St. Mark;
the Evangelist's silence is unbroken.
</p>

<p>
Was, then, the tradition unknown to St. Mark?
</p>

<p>
Several passages have been cited in support of the contention
that St. Mark had no knowledge of the doctrine. Among these
is Mk. iii. 21, 31-5 (cf. Mt. xii. 46-50; Lk. viii. 19-21). The
story of Mk. iii. 31-5 is that of the coming of Mary and of the
brothers of Jesus, while our Lord is surrounded by a crowd,
apparently in a house. When Jesus is informed that they are
without seeking Him, He says, <q>Who is my mother and my
brethren?</q>, and looking round upon the assembled company,
He continues, <q>Behold, my mother and my brethren! For
whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and
sister, and mother</q>. The account in Mt. is almost identical, and
St. Luke's story, while much briefer, is substantially the same.
But St. Mark's narrative must be read in the light of Mk. iii. 21
(cf. Gould, ICC., St. Mk., pp. 61, 67)&mdash;a passage which is omitted
in Mt. and in Lk. There, we are told that the friends of Jesus
(οἱ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ, probably <q>His kinsmen</q>) went out to lay hold on
Him, in the belief that He was mad. This fact must unquestionably
be held to explain the action of the family of Jesus in the
incident of Mk. iii. 31-5, and the question arises, Did Mary
share in the fears and intentions of the rest?<note place='foot'>Both Schmiedel (EB., 2954 f.) and Usener (EB., 3345) hold that the
incident excludes the Virgin Birth. In reference to the words of Jesus,
J. M. Thompson says: <q>The force of His aphorism about spiritual kinship
depends on the reality of the human kinship which He at once acknowledges
and rejects</q> (op. cit., p. 137).</note>
</p>

<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>

<p>
A second passage is Mk. vi. 4, where Jesus declares that
a prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and
among his own kin, and in his own house. The phrase <q><hi rend='italic'>among
his own kin</hi></q>, which both Mt. (xiii. 57) and Lk. (iv. 24) omit, is
said to point in the same direction as Mk. iii. 21, 31-5.<note place='foot'>So Schmiedel (op. cit., col. 2955). Thompson thinks that the story
of Mk. vi. 1-6 <q>could not possibly have been told as it has been, if the
narrator had known anything about the Virgin Birth</q> (op. cit., p. 138).</note> A third
incident adduced is that recorded in Mk. xii. 35-7 (Mt. xxii.
41-6; Lk. xx. 41-4), where Jesus raises the question, how the
Messiah can be at once David's Son and David's Lord. <q>Here
again</q>, writes Mr. Thompson, <q>Jesus assumes the reality of that
human parentage on which His Davidic descent relies.... Thus
it appears that on three separate occasions (and there are no
others) when Jesus, according to the earliest Gospel, spoke about
His birth, He used language naturally compatible with human
parentage, and not naturally compatible with anything else</q>
(op. cit., p. 138).
</p>

<p>
It will be seen that these passages raise more than the question
whether St. Mark knew of the Virgin Birth. They raise the
question of the knowledge of Jesus, and indeed the whole question
of the historical character of the Miraculous Conception.
</p>

<p>
Clearly, the question of the knowledge of Jesus is a determinative
consideration. Few indeed will care to argue for the
Virgin Birth tradition, if it can be proved that Jesus knew nothing
of it, but believed Himself to be the son of Joseph. Just for this
very reason we ought to be scrupulously careful in treating the
question. A scientific inquiry will hesitate to draw an inference
which makes further research superfluous. And in the present
case hesitation is amply justified. We cannot share Mr. Thompson's
conviction that the words of Jesus acknowledge a natural
parentage. (1) Such exegesis must suffer an obvious discount if
we find that the <emph>Evangelist</emph> knew nothing of the Virgin Birth.
(2) We cannot be certain that Mary shared the fears and intentions
of her children. (3) We do not know the tone in which
Jesus spoke, nor can we be sure that He intended to repudiate
His family. It may be so; but our opinion on these matters
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
must rest upon what we believe about the Virgin Birth; the
evidence is too uncertain to reverse the process.
</p>

<p>
As regards the Evangelist, we may say at once that we could
account much more easily for the passages cited, if St. Mark did
not know of the doctrine. But it is doubtful if we can say more,
so long as we confine ourselves to what St. Mark has actually
written.
</p>

<p>
There is little difficulty in the third passage (Mk. xii. 35-7),
since both Mt. and Lk. repeat it without material variation. Nor
is there the force claimed in the phrase <q>among his own kin</q>
(Mk. vi. 4). In any case Mt. has the words <q>in his own house</q>,
and probably the omission of the former phrase is sufficiently
explained by the writer's tendency to remove redundant expressions
in Mk.<note place='foot'>Cf. Allen, ICC., St. Mt., p. xxiv (c) (i), where fifty examples of this
tendency are given.</note> While in the case of St. Luke, we have to
remember that abbreviation is a common feature in his use of
Markan material.
</p>

<p>
The real difficulty lies in Mk. iii. 21, 31-5. Something more
than a desire for brevity must account for the later Evangelists'
treatment of this story. Mary's position and attitude are
certainly left very ambiguous in the light of Mk. iii. 21. In
the subsequent story St. Mark does not distinguish her from
the rest (iii. 31-5). In short, he leaves her open to the charge
of having thought her Son distraught and in need of restraint.
Ought we to find in this proof that St. Mark had no knowledge
of the Virgin Birth? Our hesitation in drawing this conclusion
arises out of the <q>objectivity</q> of St. Mark's writing. Frequently,
he does not hesitate to introduce details, to which, for various
reasons, St. <q>Matthew</q> and St. Luke took exception. He does
not appear to feel the difficulties which the later writers felt.
We could not, therefore, attach the same significance to an
<q>inconsistency</q> in Mk., as in Lk., or in Mt. For this reason,
we think that, while Mk. iii. 21, 31-5 raises very great difficulties,
the passage is not sufficient in itself to prove that St. Mark
knew nothing of the Virgin Birth. We may say that the passage
points in this direction, but that the inference requires further
confirmation. Can this be found? We believe that it can be
found in the broad fact of St. Mark's silence.
</p>

<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>

<p>
There is much greater significance in St. Mark's silence than
is sometimes allowed. Why should he, as an Evangelist, remain
silent about the Virgin Birth, if he knew of it, and believed in it?
The deep interest which he takes in the descent of the Spirit
at the Baptism, and his evident intention to describe this event
as a crucial moment in the life of Jesus, set up a strong presumption
that, had he known of the Miraculous Conception, he
would have introduced it into his narrative. There is no sufficient
analogy in his silence about other events in the life of Jesus
which later writers record; no omission can be compared with
this. Nor will reasons of prudence account for his silence; the
Second Gospel is probably too late for this argument to have
weight. There is still less force in the suggestion that St. Mark's
intention was to describe only the public ministry of Jesus.
This solution evades the difficulty, and comes perilously near
to saying that St. Mark does not record the Virgin Birth
tradition because he does not record it! The Second Gospel
describes not only the death and burial of Jesus, but also the
visit of the women to the tomb, and probably, in its original
ending, some of the Post-Resurrection Appearances of Jesus.
These facts are enough to show how inadequate it would be
to describe the Gospel as an account of the public ministry of
Jesus.
</p>

<p>
Having regard to all the facts of the case, the probability is
that St. Mark's silence must be explained on the ground that
the Evangelist had no knowledge of the Virgin Birth tradition.
The further implication is that it formed no part of Apostolic
preaching, and was unknown in the circles in which St. Mark
moved. These conclusions cannot, of course, be hardened into
certainties; they move in the realms of what is probable. Instead
of being capable of refuting other considerations which might
arise, they themselves require further confirmation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Acts</head>

<p>
There is no reference to the Virgin Birth, either direct of
indirect, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>the Acts</hi>. The presumption is that the doctrine
had no place in Apostolic preaching.<note place='foot'><q>The speeches in the earlier part may represent not untrustworthily the
primitive Jewish-Christian preaching of the period</q> (Moffatt, INT., p. 305).
Cf. Mackintosh, op. cit., p. 39.</note> This view is suggested,
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
not only by the silence of Acts, but also by the character of its
Christology.
</p>

<p>
Christ is spoken of as Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of
God by mighty works and wonders and signs (ii. 22), and as one
who was anointed by God with the Holy Spirit, and with power,
who went about doing good (x. 38). He is the Holy and
Righteous One (iii. 14), the Prince of Life (iii. 15), whom God
made both Lord and Christ (ii. 36). He is exalted to the
right hand of God, to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give
repentance to Israel and remission of sins (v. 31).
</p>

<p>
In all this, the main ground of appeal is to the Resurrection
(ii. 24, 32, iii. 15, iv. 10).<note place='foot'>Mackintosh, ib., p. 40 f. <q>What absorbs the preacher is Jesus' deliverance
from the grave and entry into glory</q>, p. 41.</note> The reference to the miracles of
Jesus (ii. 22, x. 38) is <q>the only direct and concrete allusion to
the events of His earthly life</q>.<note place='foot'>Mackintosh, ib., p. 41.</note> Even where the Davidic descent
is mentioned (ii. 25 f., xiii. 23, 33), there is no suggestion other
than that of direct physical lineage (<q>Of this man's seed hath
God according to promise brought unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus</q>,
xiii. 23).
</p>

<p>
Does the silence of Acts permit us to draw any inferences
concerning St. Luke's knowledge of the Virgin Birth tradition?
The question ought to be considered apart altogether from
Lk. i, ii. Having regard to the character of the work we do
not think that any one conclusion can safely be drawn. The
Acts obviously differs from the Gospels, and we cannot, as in
the case of the Pauline Epistles, look to it for any sufficient
account of the writer's Christology. It would therefore be unsafe
to say that the silence of Acts implies that its author had no
knowledge of the Virgin Birth.<note place='foot'>For the opposite view see Thompson, op. cit., p. 142.</note> If the doctrine was not a subject
of Apostolic preaching, St. Luke must have known this:
his silence may therefore be due to a sound historical sense.
If, at the time when he wrote the Acts, his knowledge of the
tradition had not long been gained, he would be still less likely
to perpetrate what would have been an historical anachronism.
On the other hand, we cannot, on the evidence of the Acts
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
alone, show that he did know of the doctrine, and that the
possibilities just stated represent the facts. The case is one in
which the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>argumentum ex silentio</foreign> would be untrustworthy in
either direction. It should be emphasized that this view springs
entirely out of the character of the book, and in no way affects
the use of the argument we have made in the case of Mk. and
the Epistles of St. Paul.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. The Epistle to the Hebrews</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Epistle to the Hebrews</hi> claims attention because
of the developed character of its doctrine of the Person of
Christ, and because its writer, while not an eye-witness (ii. 3),
has a vivid knowledge of many events in the earthly life of
Jesus. As regards the Virgin Birth, the Epistle is completely
silent. In the comparison with Melchizedek (vii. 1-3), no stress
can be laid on the fact that the latter is described as <q>without
father</q>; he is also <q>without mother</q> and <q>without genealogy</q>.
The reference to the descent of Jesus from the tribe of Judah
(vii. 14) is left quite bare. Even the statements concerning the
sinlessness of Christ (iv. 15, vii. 26), and the lofty characterization
of the Son as <q>the effulgence</q> of God's glory and <q>the very
impress of his substance</q> (i. 3), are made without a word as to
the method of the Incarnation. It is difficult to read the Epistle
without feeling that the writer's thought is nowhere influenced
by the Virgin Birth. Especially is this the case in such passages
as ii. 14 (<q><hi rend='italic'>Since then the children are sharers</hi> (κεκοινώνηκεν)
<hi rend='italic'>in flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner partook of</hi>
(μετέσχεν) <hi rend='italic'>the same</hi></q>),<note place='foot'>It is true different verbs and tenses are used of the children and of the
Son. The tense of μετέσχεν is explained by the fact that the Son assumed
flesh and blood at a definite time now past. The change of verb&mdash;so far as
it is not explained on stylistic grounds&mdash;is due to the fact that κεκοινώνηκεν
(of the children) expresses the universal fact of human frailty which men
share one with another, and μετέσχεν the individual entering upon this state.
The latter word does not imply a participation of a peculiar and distinct
kind.</note> and ii. 17 (<q><hi rend='italic'>It behoved him in all things
to be made like unto his brethren</hi></q>). Two considerations forbid,
however, the drawing of this conclusion. We have no certain
knowledge of the writer's identity, and we have no other work
from his pen with which to compare the Epistle. Its significance
is therefore mainly theological; it is an instance of an elaborate
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
doctrinal writing,<note place='foot'><q>In point of time, the Epistle to the Hebrews is the first systematic
sketch of Christian theology</q> (Mackintosh, <hi rend='italic'>Person of Jesus Christ</hi>, p. 78).
<q>It is not so much an epistle as an elaborate treatise</q> (Fairbairn, <hi rend='italic'>Christ in
Modern Theology</hi>, p. 320).</note> coming possibly from the seventh decade
of the first century, or, more probably, from about the year
80 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, in which no reference of any kind is made to the
Miraculous Conception. This fact, however it is explained,
cannot be ignored, and the later we date the Epistle the more
important it becomes.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VI. The Fourth Gospel</head>

<p>
The silence of <hi rend='smallcaps'>the Fourth Gospel</hi> regarding the Virgin
Birth is now generally admitted;<note place='foot'><q>Few would say, with Westcott, that virgin-birth is implied though not
explicitly asserted in Jn. i. 14....</q> (Mackintosh, ib., p. 528).</note> the only question being
whether there is not a passing reference to the doctrine in
Jn. i. 13.<note place='foot'>The view that i. 13 should be read <q>Who was born, &amp;c.</q>, is that of
Resch, Blass, and Th. Zahn. The reading appears in Tertullian, Irenaeus,
Justin, but the weight of textual authority is against it. Nor is the reading,
as representing what the Evangelist wrote, intrinsically probable. It would
rule out the maternity of Mary as well as the paternity of Joseph. The birth
would not only be not <q>of the will of man</q>; it would not even be <q>of blood</q>.
There would be nothing human about it; from first to last it would be
<q>of God</q>. In short, the reading leads directly to that docetic view of the
Person of Christ, against which the Johannine Writings so earnestly contend.
The same objection may be urged against the view that, in the accepted text
of Jn. i. 13, the Virgin Birth is present to the writer's mind <q>as a kind of
pattern or model of the birth of the children of God</q> (W. C. Allen, <hi rend='italic'>Interpreter</hi>,
Oct., 1905. Cf. Orr, op. cit., p. 111 f.; Box, op. cit., p. 145). Would
not the Fourth Evangelist have regarded such a comparison as almost a
denial that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh? Harnack has recently contended
for the singular and for a reference to the Virgin Birth. He thinks
that the verse was added in the margin, as a comment on i. 14, at a very
early time and in the Johannine circle (Peake, <hi rend='italic'>Commentary on the Bible</hi>,
p. 747 a).</note>
</p>

<p>
What the writer's silence means is one of the most difficult
problems in the question of the Virgin Birth. The case is
different from any we have yet considered. For the doctrine of
the Virgin Birth must have been perfectly well known to the
Fourth Evangelist. He was well acquainted with the Synoptic
Gospels,<note place='foot'>Cf. Sanday, op. cit., pp. 71, 143-55; Moffatt, INT., pp. 533 ff.; E. F.
Scott, <hi rend='italic'>The Fourth Gospel, Its Purpose and Theology</hi>, pp. 32 ff.; Jülicher,
INT., p. 396 f.</note> and there can be little doubt but that he read Lk. i, ii,
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
and Mt. i, ii, in the form in which we have them to-day. That
he knew of the tradition is further confirmed by the fact that, so
early probably as <hi rend='italic'>c.</hi> 110 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, the Epistles of Ignatius contain
several references to the doctrine (Eph. xviii. 2; xix. 1; Magn.
11; Tr. ix). The difficulty is further increased by the freedom
with which the Evangelist treats the Synoptics. <q>On the one
hand their contents are very largely assumed; and on the other
hand the author does not hesitate, where he thinks it necessary,
to correct them.... The author evidently felt himself at liberty
to select just those incidents which suited his purpose</q> (Sanday,
<hi rend='italic'>The Criticism of the Fourth Gospel</hi>, p. 71).
</p>

<p>
As the problem is usually treated, the silence of the Fourth
Gospel is said to mean either <q>tacit rejection</q> or <q>tacit acceptance</q>
of the tradition. It may be questioned, however, if these
alternatives sufficiently cover the possibilities of the case.
<q>Tacit rejection</q> under any circumstances means repudiation of
the doctrine. But <q>tacit acceptance</q> may mean anything from
comparative indifference to whole-hearted assent.
</p>

<p>
As containing the sharper issue, the case for <q>tacit rejection</q>
may be considered first. Among the arguments in favour of this
view, we may note the following:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) Certain passages seem to require this position. In i. 45
Jesus is described by Philip as <q><hi rend='italic'>the son of Joseph</hi></q>, and in vi. 42
the Jews at Capernaum ask the question: <q><hi rend='italic'>Is not this Jesus, the
son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?</hi></q> Three times,
moreover, controversy turns on the question of the birthplace of
Jesus. The Jews look for the birthplace of the Messiah at
Bethlehem (<q>Hath not the scripture said that the Christ cometh
of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem?</q>, vii. 42), or they
regard it as unknown (<q>When the Christ cometh, no one knoweth
whence he is</q>, vii. 27), and the objection is raised that Jesus is of
Galilee (i. 45, vii. 41 f., 52). Nowhere does the Evangelist expose
the futility of the controversy by a reference to Bethlehem as the
birthplace of Jesus. On the contrary (it is said), he himself
believed Nazareth to be the birthplace, and must thus have
rejected the tradition of Mt. i, ii.
</p>

<p>
(2) Instead of directly repudiating a particular Synoptic
narrative, the Fourth Evangelist's method is silently to set it
aside by preferring another tradition or view. Is not his
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
preference for his own Incarnation theory a tacit repudiation
of the Virgin Birth tradition?
</p>

<p>
Of these arguments the second can be allowed only if we can
show that the Evangelist looked upon the two doctrines, that of
the Virgin Birth and that of the Incarnation of the Divine
Logos, as contradictory and mutually exclusive. It is not
possible, however, to prove this, and to assume it is to beg the
question. The stronger argument is the first. It is certainly
difficult to show that the language of i. 45 and vi. 42 is that of
Philip and the Jews respectively, and that it does not reflect the
Evangelist's point of view. In the Fourth Gospel we are often
unable to assume that the writer intends to give the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipsissima
verba</foreign> of those who speak. Are i. 45 and vi. 42 cases in point,
or are they exceptions? The question is not an easy one to
decide, unless, of course, we have satisfied ourselves that the
Fourth Gospel is an entirely unhistorical work. In this case,
i. 45 and vi. 42 will represent the Evangelist's opinions. But, on
this view, we have largely forfeited our right to appeal to the
Fourth Gospel in treating the question of the Virgin Birth on its
historical side. We cannot have it both ways. If the Fourth
Gospel shows a pronounced disregard of history, it is not permissible
to draw historical arguments from it. It will have (on
this view) an important bearing on the historical question from
the theological side; but, as a primary historical authority, it
must disappear. If, on the other hand, we admit&mdash;as we have
good reason to admit&mdash;the presence of a considerable element of
valuable historical tradition in the Fourth Gospel, it is by no
means certain that i. 45 and vi. 42 represent the Evangelist's
views. As in the case of Mt. xiii. 55 and Lk. iv. 22, these
passages may indicate contemporary opinions and no more.
This view is less easy to hold in the case of i. 45 and vi. 42 than
it is in respect of the Synoptic passages; but it is a possibility
not lightly to be set aside. And if this is so, we cannot with
confidence urge that in i. 45 and vi. 42 the Fourth Evangelist
repudiates the Virgin Birth.
</p>

<p>
As regards the passages which connect Jesus with Nazareth
and Galilee, it is not necessary to infer that the writer looked
upon the town as the birthplace of our Lord. His silence
regarding Bethlehem is strange, but it does not compel us to
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
conclude that he is rejecting the tradition bound up with
Mt. i, ii, as Mr. Thompson thinks (op. cit., p. 158).<note place='foot'>iv. 44 (<q>For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his
own country</q>), unless it is a gloss, probably refers to Judaea, not Galilee.
Cf. Moffatt, INT., p. 553. Mr. Thompson argues that it refers to Galilee
(op. cit., p. 158).</note> The more
important fact is that the Evangelist does not name <emph>any town</emph>,
not even Nazareth, as the birthplace of the Eternal Word.
</p>

<p>
The view that the Fourth Evangelist tacitly rejects the Virgin
Birth fails to justify itself on internal grounds. It is also opposed
by considerations of an <emph>external</emph> character. It is from the locality
in which probably the Fourth Gospel arose, that we have the
earliest references to the Virgin Birth outside the New Testament.
Ignatius, according to Dr. Moffatt (INT., p. 211), seems <q>to fuse
the Johannine idea of the incarnation with the synoptic birth-stories</q>.
If this is so, the fact does not compel us to suppose
that the Fourth Evangelist would have done the same; but it
raises a strong presumption against the view that he explicitly
rejected the tradition.
</p>

<p>
Must we then suppose that the Evangelist's silence means
<q>tacit acceptance</q> of the doctrine? Obviously, the failure to
prove <q>tacit rejection</q> tells so far in the opposite direction. But,
as we have seen, <q>tacit acceptance</q> is a very elastic term; it
calls, therefore, for closer consideration.
</p>

<p>
It can scarcely be shown that the Fourth Evangelist accepts
the Virgin Birth in the same way in which it is held in Mt. i, ii.
There is no sufficient answer to this assertion in the plea that
the story had been already told, and that the Evangelist's
purpose was to supplement the Synoptic narratives. This is
a view of the Fourth Gospel which cannot be carried through.
It is better to suppose that the Evangelist's omission of the
Virgin Birth tradition has a more definite meaning, even though
we reject the view that its significance is silent repudiation of
the doctrine. We have also to find a place in our solution of the
problem for the difficulties left over in i. 45 and vi. 42, and in
the Evangelist's failure to name the birthplace of Jesus. In
other words, arguments insufficient to prove <q>tacit rejection</q>
cannot on that account be ignored. They must rather be held
to condition the sense in which we speak of <q>tacit acceptance</q>.
</p>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<p>
The Evangelist's silence regarding the Virgin Birth can only
be understood when it is considered along with his other notable
<q>omissions</q>. It is one of <q>a whole series of episodes, cardinal to
the Synoptic story</q> (Scott, <hi rend='italic'>Fourth Gospel</hi>, p. 42). This series
includes the Genealogy, the Virgin Birth, the Baptism, the
Temptation, the Transfiguration, the Supper, the Agony, the
Ascension. The true explanation is probably that given by
Dr. E. F. Scott: <q>These remarkable omissions ... cannot be due
to oversight or to the leaving out of what was non-essential.
Without doubt they have been made deliberately, in view of
certain theories and presuppositions with which the writer
approached his subject</q> (ib., p. 42 f.). These words set us on the
right track. The Evangelist's silence does not mean that he
rejected the Virgin Birth tradition. The Synoptic birth-stories
were more probably accepted by him <q>as a part of the orthodox
tradition, in which, as a member of the Church, he acquiesced</q>
(ib., p. 188). His doctrinal sympathies, however, lay in another
direction. It may be that at the time when he first heard of the
Virgin Birth tradition, his doctrine of the Incarnate Word had
already shaped itself in his mind. Jesus Christ was the Eternal
Son of God, the Word made flesh, who became incarnate by His
own voluntary act. The fact that his own theological scheme
was already developed, together with its specific character,<note place='foot'><q>In order to explain his silence, we must remember his strict exclusion
of all that might imply a passivity in the divine Logos. It was by His own
free act that the Son of God entered the world as man. The evangelist
shrank from any theory of His origin that might impair the central idea of
full activity, from the beginning of His work to the end</q> (Scott, ib., p. 187).</note> may
well account for his neglect of the Virgin Birth. <hi rend='italic'>He does not
deny the story, but his own Christology has superior spiritual
attractions.</hi>
</p>

<p>
It will be seen that this theory leaves little room for difficulties
arising from such passages as i. 45 and vi. 42, and explains at
once the Evangelist's attitude to the question of the birthplace
of Jesus. On the one hand, the doctrinal presuppositions of the
Virgin Birth were not operative in his mind; on the other hand,
in the light of his doctrine of the Logos, the difficulties mentioned
would scarcely be felt. The Jewish controversies must have
seemed to him so much playing with words. What did it matter
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
where the Word became flesh? What did it matter if men
called Him Joseph's son?
</p>

<p>
Our conclusion, then, is that the Fourth Evangelist tacitly
accepts the Virgin Birth, but gives it no place in his doctrinal
system. With the theological significance of this result we are
not now concerned. Our present interest is rather in its historical
implications. On the positive side, it yields little; on the
negative side, its importance is greater. It is not permissible to
argue against the Virgin Birth tradition on the ground that the
Fourth Evangelist rejected it. We may go further and say that,
having regard to his evident preoccupation with the Logos-doctrine,
it may not even be safe to make too much of the fact
that he ignored the tradition.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VII. The Pastoral and the Catholic Epistles and the Apocalypse</head>

<p>
Of the New Testament Writings, other than the First and Third
Gospels, there remain <hi rend='smallcaps'>the Pastoral and the Catholic
Epistles and the Apocalypse</hi>. Whether <hi rend='italic'>the Pastoral
Epistles</hi> are the work of St. Paul or not, their silence regarding
the Virgin Birth cannot be pressed. 1 Tim. iii. 16 (probably
a fragment from an early Christian hymn) may or may not be
significant in its silence; but, in either direction, the inference
would be unsafe. These writings are much too brief and
restricted in subject-matter to leave room for the argument from
silence. The same view is also true of <hi rend='italic'>the Catholic Epistles</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The Apocalypse</hi> contains one passage (xii) which has been
thought to indicate the writer's knowledge of the doctrine,<note place='foot'>According to Cheyne (<hi rend='italic'>Bible Problems</hi>, pp. 76 ff.), the chapter contains a
Jewish Messianic legend of Babylonian origin, which was the source of the
Virgin Birth tradition.</note> but
the inference is far from being certain, and, in any case, in view
of the date of the Book, it would add nothing to our knowledge
which cannot be learnt more clearly elsewhere.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VIII. Summary</head>

<p>
We may summarize the historical results reached in the present
chapter as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>There is no certain instance of a New Testament writer
who knew of the Virgin Birth tradition, and yet repudiated it.</hi>
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
It is more than doubtful if an exception can be found even in
the case of the Fourth Gospel, though the Evangelist makes no
doctrinal use of the tradition. If the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews knew of the doctrine, the same is probably true of that
writer also.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The doctrine had no place in the subject-matter of Apostolic
preaching.</hi> This view is supported by all the available evidence.
The silence of the Pauline Epistles, of the Acts, and of the
Second Gospel can be explained in no other way.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>The tradition was not a matter of public knowledge during
the period covered in common by the Pauline Epistles, the Second
Gospel, and Q.</hi>
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>It is also probable that the same conclusion should be extended
to the period covered by the Second Gospel alone, if this Book is
dated later than St. Paul's lifetime, as it usually is.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Until we have examined the Virgin Birth tradition reflected in
the First and Third Gospels, it would not be right to discuss
these results further, except to say that an historical argument
against the Virgin Birth based on these conclusions alone would
be precarious. The chief importance of the results reached is
the help they furnish in deciding when belief in the Virgin Birth
first became current.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Virgin Birth And The Third Gospel</head>

<p>
The question to be discussed in this chapter needs careful
definition. What we wish to discover, if possible, is whether the
Virgin Birth is an original element in the Third Gospel. This
question is not without a certain ambiguity. It is sometimes
taken as if it were equivalent to the further question, Did
St. Luke teach the Virgin Birth? It is clear that these questions
are closely connected; nevertheless, they are distinct, and should
be kept distinct. The difference is at once apparent if, for
purposes of argument, we assume that the doctrine really does
belong to a later stratum in the Gospel. In this case, all the
references to the tradition must have been inserted, either (i) by
an unknown reader, editor, or scribe, or (ii) by St. Luke himself.
In either case, the Virgin Birth would be a later element in the
Gospel; but the two senses in which this could be true are
clearly very different.
</p>

<p>
Before one could say that St. Luke did not teach the Virgin
Birth, it would be necessary to show that he did not write the
passage Lk. i. 34 f.,<note place='foot'>The passage which begins with the words: <q>And Mary said unto the
angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?</q></note> and this is a point which cannot be determined
by arguments derived from the context and subject-matter
alone. Such arguments may, or may not, be able to prove that
the doctrine is a later element, but they cannot show that it is
a non-Lukan element. This is a second and distinct step, which
is not justified until the textual and the linguistic facts have
been examined. Then, and then only, can we say if St. Luke
taught the Virgin Birth.
</p>

<p>
In the present chapter all questions of a linguistic character
will be left aside. Lk. i. 34 f. is perfectly susceptible of the
linguistic test, and this will be applied in its proper place. The
only arguments we shall consider at present will be those which
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
arise out of matters of context and subject-matter. In the light,
then, of the principle laid down above, the question whether
St. Luke taught the Virgin Birth, does not yet properly arise.
The only question we have to consider at this stage is whether
the Virgin Birth is an original element in the Third Gospel,
interpreting that question in its strictest and barest sense.
</p>

<p>
The distinction we have drawn is perfectly obvious when it is
pointed out. At the same time, one cannot read the literature
which treats of the Third Gospel in relation to the Virgin Birth,
without feeling how frequently the point has been neglected.
The assumption, that, if the Virgin Birth is found to be a later
element in the Gospel, we must straightway have recourse to the
hypothesis of non-Lukan interpolation, runs through the writings
of critics of all schools like a refrain. Its presence in the arguments
of those who deny the Virgin Birth is often sufficiently
clear. But the same assumption is also tacitly made by many
critics on the other side. It would be ungenerous, and perhaps
unwarranted, to suggest that this assumption has prevented many
orthodox writers from doing justice to the objections which have
been raised against the view that the doctrine was present in the
Gospel from the very first. That its effects have been harmful
in the interests of dispassionate investigation, is, however, hardly
open to question. In the treatment which follows, an attempt
will be made to avoid this fallacy, and to keep the discussion
within the limits which are proper to itself.
</p>

<p>
The material to be examined is found for the most part in the
first two chapters of the Gospel, and consists (1) of certain narratives
and passages, which apparently are inconsistent with the
view that the author wrote with a knowledge of the Virgin Birth,
and (2) of the passage i. 34 f., which implies the doctrine, but is
believed by many scholars to be a later insertion. Outside
chaps. i and ii, the only passages which call for notice are iii. 22,
iii. 23, and iv. 22.
</p>

<p>
We may say at once that we have few new arguments to
bring forward. The contentions we have to examine are familiar
to every one who studies the question of the Virgin Birth. They
have been brilliantly stated in two well-known articles in the
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, one by P. W. Schmiedel (on <q>Mary</q>),
and the other by Usener (<q>Nativity</q>). In a review (HJ., vol. i,
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
no. 1, p. 164), Dr. Moffatt justly describes these articles as
<q>competent and first-rate essays, which deserve alert recognition</q>.
But both these articles not only deny that the Virgin Birth was
an original element in the Third Gospel, but also that St. Luke,
the companion of St. Paul, ever taught that doctrine&mdash;and this
without any linguistic examination of the passage i. 34 f. They
provide, in fact, a clear illustration of the point we have already
discussed. Inasmuch, then, as our purpose is to consider the
question, Was the Virgin Birth an original element in the Third
Gospel?, interpreted in its strictest terms, we shall need to state
and weigh the arguments afresh. This is the more desirable,
because, in the form in which these scholars present their case,
each argument is put forward with an assurance and a finality
which individually it does not merit. It is the cumulative force
of a number of arguments, each of which has strong presumptive
value, which ultimately carries conviction; not a series of arguments
each of which is conclusive in itself. We do not suppose,
of course, that a writer like Schmiedel would deny anything so
obvious as this. Nevertheless, very many English readers feel
that his several arguments are stated too much in the light of the
result. Moreover, they appear to be shaped by presuppositions
which are themselves fatal to the Virgin Birth. In the present
treatment of the question, an attempt will be made to assign to
each argument its proper force, to observe its limitations as well
as its cogency. The result sought is not a conclusion to which
we can append a triumphant Q. E. D., but that hypothesis,
whatever it be, which best explains the observed facts taken as
a whole.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Narratives and Passages Said to be Inconsistent With the View</head>

<p>
Our first task must be to examine <hi rend='italic'>those narratives and passages
in the Third Gospel which are said to be irreconcilable with the
view that St. Luke wrote in the belief that Jesus was miraculously
conceived of the Virgin Mary by the Holy Ghost</hi>. What we have
to ask is whether or not they are consistent with that supposition.
We begin with Lk. iii. 22.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(a) Lk. iii. 22, according to the <q>Western Text</q></head>

<p>
In the great majority of existing MSS. this passage reads as
in the RV., <q>Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

pleased</q>. But in Codex Bezae, supported by Old Latin MSS.
and by quotations in Justin and Clement, the passage reads,
<q><hi rend='italic'>Thou art my Son: to-day have I begotten Thee</hi></q>. Blass
(<hi rend='italic'>Philology of the Gospels</hi>, p. 168 f.) believes this to be the genuine
Lukan reading, and explains the common text as <q>a product of
assimilation to the other Gospels</q>. Usener (EB., col. 3348)
also accepts the <q>Western</q> reading, and says, <q>Thus the passage
in Lk. was read, in the Greek Church down to about 300 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
and in the Latin West down to and beyond 360 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></q> Dr.
Moffatt (INT., 3rd ed., p. 269) goes so far as to say that the
Lukan reading <q>undoubtedly was υἱός μου εἷ σύ· ἐγὼ σήμερον
γεγέννηκά σε</q>. He follows this reading in his <hi rend='italic'>Translation of
the New Testament</hi>, and says (p. 74), <q>In the other MSS. it has
been altered, for harmonistic reasons</q>. These opinions, and the
arguments upon which they rest, have great weight. If the
<q>Western</q> reading is accepted, a strong presumption is set up
against the view that the Third Gospel originally contained the
Virgin Birth; for it is very difficult to believe that the hand
which wrote, <q>To-day have I begotten Thee</q>, had already described
the miraculous birth. (Cf. also Harnack, <hi rend='italic'>Sayings</hi>,
pp. 310 ff.)
</p>

<p>
At first sight Blass's argument would seem to show a way of
escape from this conclusion. He defends the <q>Western</q> reading
by showing the close connexion which it has with the following
verse. <q>The <q><emph>to-day</emph> have I begotten Thee</q> stands in opposition
to the <q>thirty years</q>, and the <q>Thou art <emph>my</emph> Son</q> likewise to
<q>being as was supposed the son of <emph>Joseph</emph></q></q> (op. cit., p. 169).
The phrase <q>as was supposed</q> (verse 23) will fall to be discussed
next. Meanwhile we may observe that the connexion which
Blass notes is actually strengthened if what St. Luke originally
wrote was <q>being the son of Joseph</q>. This is the real point in
the parallelism, as Blass himself indicates by printing the name
Joseph in italics.
</p>

<p>
If the <q>Western</q> reading is to be accepted, a very interesting
question arises as regards St. Luke's conception of the Baptism
of Jesus. There is no need to suppose that he looked upon it as
the occasion of the imparting of the Divine Sonship. If the
connexion which Blass notes be allowed, it is probably purely
literary, and the form in which St. Luke reports the logion is
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
determined by his recollection of Ps. ii. 7.<note place='foot'>Or was taken from Q. See Harnack's <hi rend='italic'>Sayings</hi>, p. 314; <hi rend='italic'>Oxford
Studies in Synoptic Problem</hi>, p. 187.</note> There is no intention,
that is to say, on his part, of describing an act of deification or
even adoption. But if the connexion is literary, we return again
to the question, Can we think that St. Luke would have written
the passage in this form, if he had already described the
miraculous birth? Can we explain his deliberate preference for
the language of Ps. ii. 7? The answer is, we feel bound to say,
It is difficult, if it is not impossible. The force of this argument
rests, nevertheless, upon the confidence with which we can accept
the <q>Western</q> reading; and while the present writer would
favour that reading himself, he recognizes that its attestation is
not such as to compel acceptance. Moffatt's claim that it
<q>undoubtedly was</q> the Lukan reading is too strong. The most
we can say is that it has great, if not very great, probability in
its favour.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(b) The Lukan Genealogy and Lk. iii. 23</head>

<p>
It will be best at this point to consider the question of the
Lukan Genealogy, and also the passage to which attention has
just been called: <q>being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph</q>
(RV.).
</p>

<p>
An examination of the Genealogy reveals the fact that it is
artificially constructed, it is an arrangement of names in multiples
of seven (cf. Sanday, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, p. 202). The whole list contains
seventy-seven names. From Adam to Abraham there are twenty-one
names (7 x 3); from Isaac to David fourteen names (7 x 2), if
we include, as we probably should, the name Admin, as in the
RV. margin; from Nathan to Shealtiel twenty-one names; and
from Zerubbabel to Christ twenty-one names. Not only is this
so, but in order to preserve the symbolic arrangement, names are
repeated and omitted. Thus in verse 36, the compiler has
preferred the LXX to the Hebrew. This permits the name
Cainan to be introduced into the Genealogy twice, as the son
of Arphaxad in verse 36, and again as the son of Enos in
verse 37. No Hebrew MS. mentions Cainan as the son of
Arphaxad. Again, in the list from Isaac to David, the name
Ram (cf. 1 Chron. ii. 10 and Ruth iv. 19) is omitted, and in its
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
place the two names Admin and Arni appear. Whatever be the
explanation of these facts, it is significant that in this way the
symmetrical arrangement is preserved.
</p>

<p>
It is not probable that a Genealogy of such an artificial
character was constructed by St. Luke himself. He shows no
predilection for symbolic numbers in his writings, and does not
indeed appear to observe this feature in the list. (Cf. Sanday,
op. cit., p. 202, and contrast Mt. i. 17.) Probably he found the
Genealogy ready to hand. The fact that it traces the descent to
Adam may have appealed to him, in view of his own bent of
mind, and it may have been this feature in the list which led him
to incorporate it in his Gospel. The words <q>the son of God</q>
with which the list ends, may be due to St. Luke himself,
<q>added for the sake of Gentile readers, to remind them of the
Divine origin of the human race</q> (Plummer, ICC., St. Luke,
p. 105)·
</p>

<p>
It does not seem likely that the Genealogy in its original
form, in the form, that is to say, in which St. Luke found it, contained
the words which now stand in iii. 23, <q><hi rend='italic'>as was supposed</hi></q>.
It is generally allowed at the present day that the Genealogies,
both in the First Gospel and in the Third, trace the ancestry of
Jesus through Joseph. But unlike the Matthaean Genealogy,
that in Lk. gives us no reason to suppose that <emph>legal</emph> descent only
is traced in it. It is therefore difficult to believe that its author
intended to construct a chain of descent in which the vital link
should contain the words, <q>as was supposed</q>. These words more
naturally give the impression of being a later insertion intended
to adapt the Genealogy to a new situation. For our present
purpose the important question is, Are these words the words of
St. Luke?, and what is still more vital, At what point, if Lukan,
were they inserted in the Genealogy,&mdash;when it was first incorporated
in the Gospel, or at some subsequent time? If from the
first they stood where they now stand, it is obvious that the
Third Gospel taught the Virgin Birth from the beginning. If, on
the other hand, they were added after the Gospel was written
(or its earlier chapters), this supports the view that the doctrine
is a later element.
</p>

<p>
The data at present at our disposal do not enable us to decide
between these alternatives. We may argue <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> that it is
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
unlikely that St. Luke would have thought it worth while to
introduce the Genealogy at all, if at the time when he wove it
into his Gospel he had realized the necessity of interpolating the
words <q>as was supposed</q>. In other words, we may say that had
he known of the Virgin Birth from the first he would never have
made use of the Genealogy. And further, we may argue that we
best conserve St. Luke's reputation as a skilful writer by supposing
the phrase <q>as was supposed</q> to be a correction, introduced
to make the best of a Genealogy, used in the first place
under presuppositions which new information had now led him
to discard. Short of excising the Genealogy altogether&mdash;we may
say&mdash;he did the best he could. But such speculations, however
attractive, do not lead to a conclusion which we can regard with
confidence. It is better to leave iii. 23 to depend upon the conclusion
to which we come with regard to i. 34 f. This is the
crucial passage, and if this should prove to be a later insertion,
then iii. 23 must also be regarded as such, introduced by the
same hand at the same time and for the same reasons.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(c) The Narratives of Lk. ii</head>

<p>
We have now to examine the narratives of Lk. ii, and to ask,
<hi rend='italic'>Under what presuppositions were they shaped?</hi> The incidents
which call for special notice are the Purifying, the meeting with
Simeon in the Temple, and the visit of Jesus to Jerusalem at the
age of twelve. The five passages which speak of <q>the parents</q>
of Jesus will be considered separately. There is no need to dwell
on the story of the visit of the shepherds. It goes without
saying that it nowhere presupposes the Virgin Birth. On the
other hand, there is nothing in the presentation of the story
which is alien to the doctrine.
</p>

<p>
Turning to the story of the Purifying in Lk. ii. 22-4, we are
met by the question, What are we to understand by the phrase
<q><hi rend='italic'>their purification</hi></q> (ii. 22)? Attempts have been made to take
the pronoun as referring to the mother and the child, but, in view
of the construction of the passage, this exegesis is impossible.
Joseph and Mary are clearly the unexpressed subject of the verb
in the sentence in which the pronoun <q>their</q> occurs (<q>And when
the days of <emph>their</emph> purification ... were fulfilled, <emph>they</emph> brought him
up to Jerusalem</q>). Schmiedel holds that the word <q>their</q> refers
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
to Joseph and Mary,<note place='foot'>EB., col. 2955 n. Cf. Plummer, ICC., St. Lk., p. 63.</note> and without doubt this opinion is correct.
But if this is so, is it probable that St. Luke had the thought of
a virgin birth in the background of his mind when he first penned
the phrase? Is not the pronoun one which we may think he
would have been anxious to avoid? Nor was there any need
for him to introduce it, since, according to the Levitical law, it
was only the mother who was made unclean by a birth (cf. Lev.
xii). Schmiedel, who calls attention to this fact, thinks that the
writer has made <q>an archaeological error</q>. <q>This error serves to
show that the writer regarded Joseph as the actual father of
Jesus; otherwise he could not have thought of him at all as
unclean</q> (EB., col. 2955). Even if we think that Schmiedel's
remorseless logic is too confidently applied, the fact remains that
St. Luke's pronoun is as unnecessary as it is ambiguous. The
difficulty of the expression is not felt by the modern mind alone.
It is reflected in two subsequent textual alterations. Instead of
<q>their purification</q>, the Codex Bezae reads <q>his purification</q>,
and the Sin. Syr. MS., together with the cursive 76, has the
pronoun <q>her</q>. The textual evidence forbids us to accept the
reading <q>her purification</q>, but this is assuredly the phrase we
should expect a writer to use who has just told the story of
a virgin birth.
</p>

<p>
In the two remaining stories, that of the meeting with Simeon,
and that of the visit of Jesus to Jerusalem, there is a common
element which provokes reflection in <emph>the surprise of Joseph and
Mary</emph>. In reference to the prophecy of Simeon concerning Jesus,
we are told that they <q><hi rend='italic'>were marvelling at</hi></q> the things that were
said (ii. 33). We can readily account for this remark, if St. Luke
had no knowledge of the Virgin Birth at the time of writing, for
the prophecy of Simeon transcends that of the angelic announcement
of i. 31-3. Whereas the latter does not leave the soil of
Israel, the former speaks of a revelation to the Gentiles. We
could say, then, that the wider scope of the prophecy of Simeon
provides room for wonder. But can we say this if St. Luke
believed Mary to have received the announcement of a virgin
birth, which, moreover, had been fulfilled? Would he have
thought any prophecy called for wonder after such facts as
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
these? The same difficulty arises in the story of the visit to the
Temple. After St. Luke has recorded the pregnant words of
Jesus, <q>Wist ye not that I must be in my Father's house?</q>, he
writes: <q><hi rend='italic'>And they understood not the saying which he spake unto
them</hi></q> (ii. 50). If, in this case, as distinguished from ii. 33, the
Evangelist had said that they marvelled, the difficulty would be
less great. It might then have been argued that, inasmuch as
the facts of His birth had not been made known to the boy
Jesus, there was room for wonder that already He should have
attained to such a consciousness of filial relationship to God.
But to say that they did not understand His words is an
astonishing statement on the part of a writer who believes the
Virgin Birth. On the other hand, it is a perfectly natural remark,
if we can presume the Evangelist to have written in the absence
of such a belief.<note place='foot'>In this connexion it should be observed that the same note of wonder
appears in ii. 18 in the case of all those who hear the shepherds' words. But
according to the terms of ii. 17, what <emph>they</emph> are told is the angelic message of
ii. 10-12, in which the Virgin Birth is not mentioned. The presumption is
that ii. 33 stands upon the same plane.</note>
</p>

<p>
Speaking of the narratives of Lk. ii, as a whole, we may say
that, apart from the references to <q>the parents</q>, which remain to
be considered, distinct difficulties are raised if we must believe
that St. Luke knew of the Virgin Birth at the time when he first
wrote the chapter, and that greater justice can be done to the
narratives if we can presume him to have written them without
that knowledge. How far this view is supported by the five
passages which speak of Joseph and Mary, we have now to
consider.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(d) The References to Joseph and Mary in Lk. ii</head>

<p>
These passages are as follows: ii. 27, <q><hi rend='italic'>the parents</hi></q>; ii. 41 and
43, <q><hi rend='italic'>his parents</hi></q>; ii. 33, <q><hi rend='italic'>his father and his mother</hi></q>; and ii. 48,
<q><hi rend='italic'>thy father and I</hi></q>. The point to be considered is whether we
can suppose St. Luke to have known of the Virgin Birth at the
time when he used these expressions.
</p>

<p>
The last passage (ii. 48) differs from the rest, and should not
be pressed. It is reasonable to urge that, in addressing the
boy Jesus, Mary would naturally speak in this way, even if the
Virgin Birth is historically true; and that it is conceivable that
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
St. Luke, while himself holding the doctrine, should have been
so far faithful to his sources as to preserve Mary's words in this
form.
</p>

<p>
In this respect the four passages which remain are quite
different, <hi rend='italic'>in that they are expressions which St. Luke himself
employs</hi>. This gives them a distinctive character which has
often been overlooked. It has been too frequently assumed
that these passages are of like character to those which belong
to the story of Jesus at the synagogue at Nazareth. In this
incident the Jews speak of Jesus as <q>the carpenter's son</q>
(Mt. xiii. 55. Cf. Mk. vi. 3, <q>the carpenter, the son of Mary</q>).
St. Luke, who records the same incident, but perhaps follows
a special source of his own (Lk. iv. 16 ff.), gives the question
in the form, <q>Is not this Joseph's son?</q> With regard to these
passages, it is open to any one to urge that in them we have
instances of the accuracy with which the Gospels record contemporary
beliefs, which were natural but erroneous. The
language of the Jews, it may be said, is justified by ignorance
of the true facts, and its retention by Evangelists who teach
the Virgin Birth is evidence of their fidelity to detail. This
is a reasonable argument, and it cannot be gainsaid, until the
whole question has been faced (again, as in the case of ii. 48).
But the four passages in Lk. ii stand upon an entirely different
footing. In these passages it is not a question of what is justified
by ignorance, but of what is possible in the light of knowledge.
Assuming that we have to do with a writer who believes
Jesus to be the son of Mary by the direct operation of the Holy
Ghost, we have to ask whether, believing this, and having (on
this assumption) just stated this very thing, that writer would
be at all likely to speak of <q>the parents</q>, <q>his parents</q>, and,
indeed, to use an expression so definite as <q>his father and his
mother</q>. In short, granting that St. Luke has recorded the
language of the Nazarenes, can we suppose that he would have
used the same language himself in the light of the Virgin Birth?
It is not as if these modes of speech were indispensable. The
words <q>Joseph and Mary</q> could easily have been employed,
and in this way all danger of ambiguity removed. In the face
of a fact so unique as a virgin birth, one would expect an effort
to avoid ambiguity; all the more, in the case of a writer, with
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
whose apt choice of words and delicacy of expression scholars
like Ramsay and Harnack have made us familiar.
</p>

<p>
In saying this we are not guilty of imposing modern canons
of accuracy upon an ancient writer. The difficulties we ourselves
feel have long been felt. <q>It is very noteworthy that six
old Latin codices in ii. 41 have <foreign rend='italic'>Ioseph et Maria</foreign> for <q>his parents</q>
(οἱ γονεῖς αὐτοῦ); most uncials in ii. 33 substitute <q>Joseph</q> (ὁ
ιωσηφ) for <q>his father</q> (ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ)</q> (Schmiedel, EB.,
col. 2955). None of these readings can claim, of course, to be
original, since admittedly they represent attempts to remove
difficulties. Their significance lies in the fact that they indicate
that those difficulties have long been felt. They show that
we are not asking an ancient writer to conform to modern
standards, when we assert that St. Luke has expressed himself
with an ambiguity which it is difficult, if not impossible, to
understand, if he wrote from the first in the knowledge of the
Virgin Birth.
</p>

<p>
The impression made by the narratives of Lk. ii is thus
deepened and confirmed by the several references to Joseph
and Mary.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(e) Lk. ii. 5</head>

<p>
The bearing of the facts examined thus far is in the direction
of showing the Virgin Birth to belong to a later stratum in the
Gospel. One passage in Lk. ii might seem to invalidate this
view. In the Revised Version, verse 5 reads: <q><hi rend='italic'>to enrol himself
with Mary, who was betrothed to him, being great with child</hi></q>.
These words, if they must stand, imply that the Virgin Birth
is known to the writer. But, apart altogether from the historical
character of the miracle, it is highly probable that we ought
to read: <q><hi rend='italic'>with Mary his wife</hi></q>.<note place='foot'>So among others Schmiedel, Usener, Häcker, and Blass, who writes
(op. cit., p. 171 n.): <q><q>The espoused wife</q> of the ordinary text is a very clear
corruption, due to an assimilation to i. 27 (where the case is quite different)
and to dogmatic prejudices ...</q> <q>That we have here a case of real contamination
is seen very plainly in the old Freising MS., in which the ancient
variants τῇ γυναικὶ αὐτοῦ and τῇ ἐμνηστευμένῃ αὐτῷ still stand together in
immediate juxtaposition</q> (Usener, EB., col. 3350).</note> This is the reading of the
Sinaitic Syriac and of the Old Latin MSS. a, b, c; and the
word <q>wife</q> together with <q>betrothed</q>, also appears in AC<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>ΓΔΛ,
l, q*, Syr<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>p</hi>, vulg., goth., aeth. (Moffatt, INT., p. 269). There
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
is much to be said for the view that this is one of the cases in
which <q>Western</q> readings, where Old Syriac and Old Latin
MSS. agree, probably preserve an original text.<note place='foot'>On the agreement of the Old Syriac and Old Latin against the great
uncials, cf. Kirsopp Lake (<hi rend='italic'>The Text of the NT.</hi>, p. 90 f.), <q>Perhaps the general
result is to make it probable that W. H. (largely from lack of evidence) underestimated
the possibility that a consensus of the Old Latin and Old Syriac
may give us a really primitive text even when opposed to the great uncials</q>.
To similar effect Burkitt writes, <q>It is, however, in the direction here
indicated&mdash;viz., the preservation of the true text in a considerable number
of cases by <q>Western</q> documents alone&mdash;that criticism may ultimately be
able to advance beyond the point reached by Hort</q> (EB., col. 4990 f.).
<q>I am unable to assume that the edition of Westcott and Hort gives us
a final text in either Gospel [Mt. and Mk.]. In particular, I am inclined to
believe that the second century readings, attested by the ecclesiastical
writers of that century, and by the Syriac and Latin versions, are often
deserving of preference</q> (W. C. Allen, ICC., St Mt., p. lxxxvii).</note> When we
add the argument of transcriptional probability, it is difficult
to resist this conclusion. One can easily understand how the
reading <q>with Mary his wife</q> could come to be altered to <q>with
Mary, who was betrothed to him</q> by those who imagined that
the former was inconsistent with the Virgin Birth. But, if the
words <q>with Mary, who was betrothed to him</q> stood in the
primitive text, can we give any satisfactory explanation of
the change? When we consider that from New Testament
times the Virgin Birth was part of the faith of the Church,
questioned by few save the Ebionites and some of the Gnostic
sects, the supposition that <q>with Mary his wife</q> is a later corruption,
becomes improbable in the extreme. It is hardly
sufficient to adopt Plummer's suggestion, that <q>the γυναικί of
A. Vulg. Syr. and Aeth. is a gloss, but a correct one</q> (op. cit.,
p. 53). Must we not find more than a gloss? Moreover, is
this a satisfactory explanation of the Sin. Syr. and of those
Old Latin MSS. which have <q>wife</q> without <q>betrothed</q>? We
should probably conclude that in this instance the <q>Western</q>
reading, supported by transcriptional probability, must outweigh
the evidence of even the great uncials, and that what St. Luke
wrote was <q>with Mary his wife</q>.
</p>

<p>
If this view is sound, the verse in itself is not necessarily inconsistent
with the Virgin Birth, since it may reasonably be
urged that it carries us no further than Mt. i. 24, where the
marriage is implied.<note place='foot'><q>And Joseph ... took unto him his wife.</q></note> If this fact is put forward in a narrative
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
which expressly teaches the Virgin Birth, it could be so here.
The phrase <q>with Mary his wife</q> is certainly congruous with the
view that the doctrine is a later element in the Third Gospel,
but it would be improper to employ it in support of that view.
(The case is like those of ii. 48, iv. 22.) But even if we must
leave the question open, at any rate we have no longer to reckon
with the words, <q>with Mary, who was betrothed to him</q>. There
is nothing, therefore, in the verse which is in conflict with the
view that St. Luke had no knowledge of the Virgin Birth when
he first wrote his Gospel.
</p>

<p>
Before leaving this part of the subject it may be well to recall
the nature of the argument. The several points treated are not
regarded as contentions which inexorably demand a certain conclusion,
but as distinct difficulties, greater or less, which arise, on
the view that St. Luke knew of the Virgin Birth from the first.
We may fairly say that the facts examined thus far would be best
satisfied by considering the Virgin Birth as a later element in the
Gospel; but, until we have investigated the important passage
Lk. i. 34 f., it would be precarious to say more.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Passage Lk. i. 34 f</head>

<p>
In the Revised Version Lk. i. 34f. reads as follows: <q><hi rend='italic'>And
Mary said unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not
a man? (35) And the angel answered and said unto her, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most High
shall overshadow thee: wherefore also that which is to be born
shall be called holy, the Son of God.</hi></q> As regards the last clause,
the margin gives the alternative rendering: <q>the holy thing
which is to be born shall be called the Son of God</q>. The
difference rests upon a question of punctuation in the Greek, and
does not affect our immediate problem.
</p>

<p>
Our purpose in this section is to inquire how far the view,
which is widely held, that Lk. i. 34 f. is a later insertion is
justified. But two important questions must detain us first.
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Is the assumption we have made thus far, that Lk. i. 34 f.
implies the Virgin Birth, tenable? What is the true interpretation
of the passage? (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) What is the purport of the angelic announcement
in Lk. i. 30-3? Is Dr. Plummer's language justified, when,
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
in reference to this message, he speaks of <q>the strange declaration
that she [Mary] is to have a son before she is married</q> (op. cit.,
p. 24)? Is there any suggestion of a virgin birth?
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(a) The Interpretation of Lk. i. 34 f</head>

<p>
In the text as it stands, in answer to the angel's words in
Lk. i. 30-3, Mary says: <q><hi rend='italic'>How shall this be, seeing I know not</hi>
(οὐ γινώσκω) <hi rend='italic'>a man?</hi></q> The interpretation of this verse depends
upon the force we give to the word γινώσκω. Schmiedel
(EB., col. 2956) thinks that γινώσκω in this verse <q>cannot mean
the act of concubitus for which the word is often employed</q>,
because it is here used in the present tense. On the other hand,
the quite general sense of knowledge in the way of acquaintanceship,
is also, in his view, <q>equally precluded</q>, since it would be
<q>quite meaningless in the present context</q>. Accordingly, he
finds the true interpretation to be <q>the intermediate one; I have
no such acquaintanceship with any man as might lead to the
fulfilment of this prophecy</q>. In other words, Mary's objection
or difficulty is that she is not even betrothed. Schmiedel is not
daunted by the fact that this interpretation is in conflict with
Lk. i. 27 (<q>a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph</q>).
Indeed, the contradiction is given as one reason for regarding
Lk. i. 34 f. as a later insertion. In this respect Schmiedel's view
will probably not command much support. He gives no example
of γινώσκω used in the special sense in which he interprets it, and
fails to justify his rejection of the common use of the verb.
(See Th-Gr., p. 117; VGT., p. 127.) It is altogether preferable
to follow Dr. Plummer (op. cit., p. 24), whose view is indicated
in the references which he gives to the OT. passages, Gen. xix. 8;
Judg. xi. 39; Num. xxxi. 17. <q>The words</q>, says Dr. Plummer,
<q>are the avowal of a maiden conscious of her own purity</q>.
According to this view the phrase <q>seeing I know not a man</q>
must be interpreted of the marital relationship. Mary's perplexity
is that she, an unmarried woman, is promised an
immediate conception. It is impossible to accept Schmiedel's
view, when he says: <q>Mary takes the words of the angel as
referring to a fulfilment in the way of nature</q>. This explanation
is, of course, consistent on the interpretation which Schmiedel
gives to Mary's question, but not on that which we have found
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
reason to prefer. Had Mary understood the angelic message to
mean a natural human birth after marriage, there would have
been no cause for perplexity. Her words, <q>How shall this be,
seeing I know not a man?</q>, are clearly <hi rend='italic'>a reply to what is understood
as the announcement of an immediate conception</hi>, and not of
a birth within the marriage tie.
</p>

<p>
If this view is taken of Mary's words, it follows that verse 35
must be explained as the yet clearer announcement of a virgin
birth, supernaturally caused. If the verse is treated in itself,
it is possible to interpret it of an ordinary human birth, and
there is much that is attractive in the interpretation. The words
may be said to speak of the Holy Ghost who should come upon
Mary to inspire and preserve the purity of her soul in the act of
conception. They may speak, that is to say, of God's use of His
own appointed agencies. But, to accept this view, it would be
necessary to regard the words <q>seeing I know not a man</q> as
a later insertion, and, though this opinion has been held by some
(including Kattenbusch, Weinel, J. M. Thompson), it does not on
the whole commend itself as a satisfactory solution of the problem
(see further pp. 69 ff.). We are compelled therefore to accept the
ordinary interpretation of verse 35, as implying the Miraculous
Conception.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(b) The Purport of the Angelic Announcement in Lk. i. 30-3</head>

<p>
In treating Mary's question in Lk. i. 34. we have concluded
that it reflects the point of view of one who has received the
announcement of a miraculous birth. But this conclusion does
not compel us to interpret the words of Lk. i. 30-3 as containing
such an announcement. We have to examine the passage so as
to determine whether as a matter of fact it is susceptible of that
interpretation. That its present context requires this view of
Lk. i. 30-3 is a fact not lightly to be regarded; nevertheless, it
must find justification <emph>within the passage itself</emph> before it can be
accepted.
</p>

<p>
In the Revised Version, the angelic message reads as follows:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God.</hi> (31) <hi rend='italic'>And
behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and
shalt call his name Jesus.</hi> (32) <hi rend='italic'>He shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the Most High: and the Lord God shall give
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
unto him the throne of his father David</hi>: (33) <hi rend='italic'>and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall
be no end.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
We have already expressed the view that this prophecy moves
strictly within Jewish limits (p. 29). Detailed study of the
passage only serves to confirm this opinion. The Sonship mentioned
in verse 32 bears a purely Messianic character. Dr.
Plummer justly remarks: <q>The title υἱὸς ᾿Υψίστου expresses
some very close relation between Jesus and Jehovah, but not the
Divine Sonship in the Trinity</q> (op. cit., p. 23). <hi rend='italic'>Nothing is either
said or implied in this announcement of a miraculous birth.</hi> The
terms of the promise to Mary would be perfectly fulfilled by an
ordinary birth within the marriage tie, so far, that is to say, as
the mode of birth is concerned. We must therefore reject the
view which speaks of <q>the strange declaration that she is to bear
a son before she is married</q> (Plummer). We look in vain for
this declaration. We agree that Mary's question in verse 34
demands such a declaration in order to make it rational. In
fact, we ourselves have argued that verse 34 is <q>a reply to what
is understood as the announcement of an immediate conception</q>.
Nevertheless, even on the most generous interpretation of
Lk. i. 30-3, it is impossible to find in the passage any such
announcement.<note place='foot'>While we are unable to acquiesce in Schmiedel's view that <q>Mary takes
the words of the angel as referring to a fulfilment in the way of nature</q>, we
may fairly say that, if the passage Lk. i. 30-8 is a unity, Mary ought to have
been represented as taking the angel's words in this way, and that this would
be the plain natural sense in which to take them.</note> There is thus a radical difference of point of
view between the angelic announcement of Lk. i. 30-3 and
Mary's question in Lk. i. 34. This difference of standpoint will
be urged as one, though not the only reason for regarding
Lk. i. 34 f. as a later insertion. But before we examine these
reasons, we need to consider whether after all the angelic
announcement may not contain some implication (which does
not lie upon the surface of the passage) that a Miraculous Conception
is promised.
</p>

<p>
We find it impossible to rest satisfied in the suggestion of
W. C. Allen, that there may have been some unrecorded indication
of something unique in the conception (<hi rend='italic'>Interpreter</hi>, 1905,
p. 121 f.). A suggestion of this kind can neither be justified
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
nor gainsaid, and is valuable only as a confirmation of the view
that there is nothing <q>recorded</q> in Lk. i. 30-3 of a unique conception.
To launch upon the waters of what is unrecorded
would seem to be a policy of despair. There is much more
to be said for an extremely interesting suggestion of Canon Box
in his article on the Virgin Birth in Hastings's <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of
Christ and the Gospels</hi> (see vol. ii, p. 806 a). Box argues that
in the angelic announcement of Lk. i. 30-3 <q>an immediate
conception is meant</q>. Accepting the view that a Hebrew
original underlies the nativity-narratives of Lk. i, ii, he thinks
that this original has been incorrectly translated in Lk. i. 31,
where, in the Greek, we have the future tense συλλήψῃ, <q>thou
shalt conceive</q>. <q>The Hebrew original of συλλήψῃ would be
a participle</q>, he says, <q>and the exact rendering would be,
<q>Behold, thou art conceiving now</q></q>. There can be no doubt
that, if this view can be allowed, the angelic announcement
really does speak of a miraculous birth, and thus an adequate
explanation is given of Mary's surprise in Lk. i. 34. There
are, however, certain objections which, in the judgement of the
present writer, appear to be fatal to this theory. We need
not press the objection that it rests upon an initial assumption,
the existence of the supposed Hebrew original, since this theory
of a Hebrew (or Aramaic) documentary source is accepted by
most British scholars. Nor is it more than a formal objection
if we question if the word συλλήψῃ would necessarily be represented
in the supposed Hebrew original by a participle. In the
Hebrew NT. published by the British and Foreign Bible Society,
the adjective הָרָה is used, and this is the case in similar passages
in the Hebrew OT., viz. Gen. xvi. 11, xxxviii. 24; Judg. xiii. 7
(verse 3, perf.); 1 Sam. iv. 19; 2 Sam. xi. 5; Isa. vii. 14. A more
serious objection arises from Lk. ii. 21, where it is said that the
name Jesus was so called by the angel <q>before he was conceived
in the womb</q> (πρὸ τοῦ συλληφθῆναι αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ κοιλίᾳ). On
the theory we are considering, this must be held to be either
a second mistranslation of the Hebrew original, or a departure
from it. In either case we must conclude that a promised
conception, and not an immediate one, was the considered view
of the translator of the Hebrew document. A second and
conclusive objection to the theory of Canon Box rests upon
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
questions of grammatical syntax. Is it correct to say that
<q>the exact rendering</q> of the participle (or adj.) would be,
<q>Behold, thou art conceiving now</q>? It is true that the active
participle is <q>mainly descriptive of something present</q> (Davidson,
<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew Syntax</hi>, p. 134), but it is also true, to quote the same
authority, that <q>the participle does not indicate time, its colour
in this respect being taken from the connexion in which it
stands</q>. The same consideration also applies to הָרָה in all the
OT. instances referred to above. Where it is made clear in
the context that conception has already taken place, הָרָה is translated
in the RV. by the present (cf. Gen. xvi. 11, xxxviii. 24;
2 Sam. xi. 5). Where, however, there is no such indication, it
is rendered by the future, and the announcement is treated as
a promise (cf. Judg. xiii. 7).
</p>

<p>
To convict the translator of the Hebrew document of an
error in translation, it is clearly necessary to show from the
context of Lk. i. 31 that conception has already taken place.
In other words, the translation preferred by Canon Box, if it
is to be accepted, must be justified by some statement, either
previously made, or made within the angelic announcement
itself; it must be required, that is to say, by something in
the narrative previous to Mary's question in Lk. i. 34.<note place='foot'>The claim, therefore, that the suggested translation is supported by the
words <q>with haste</q> in verse 39 (Box) cannot be sustained. Moreover, these
words are easily satisfied on the usual view of a promised conception. See
further an article by the present writer in the <hi rend='italic'>Expository Times</hi> (May, 1919),
<hi rend='italic'>Is the Lukan Narrative of the Birth of Christ a Prophecy?</hi> In l. 16 in the
second column read: <q>It could <emph>not</emph> be anything else</q>.</note> But
these conditions, which are by no means arbitrary, cannot be
met. We must, therefore, conclude that the translator was
quite justified, when he used the future (συλλήψῃ), and so
represented the announcement as a prophecy; and we must
draw this conclusion, irrespective altogether of the difference
of point of view which thus stands revealed between this
announcement and verse 34 in the connexion in which it now
appears. Indeed, the argument of Canon Box seems capable
of being employed in a direction the very reverse of that
intended. It could be argued that since, in point of fact, the
translator has used the future in verse 31, there was nothing
in the Hebrew original to suggest to his mind the idea of an
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
immediate conception; not even the statement of verse 34,
which might have suggested, though it does not justify, the
rendering, <q>Behold, thou art conceiving now</q>. Thus we might
enlist the considered view of the translator, that a promised
conception is meant, in support of the contention that Lk. i. 34 f.
is a later insertion. Without pressing this view, we may fairly
say that there is much more to be said for it than for the theory
we have discussed. The latter theory, in spite of all that can
be urged in its favour, fails to justify itself. In that case its
failure seems to illustrate the somewhat desperate expedients
to which we must have recourse, in order to find in the angelic
announcement the thought of an immediate conception. On
the question as a whole, we can only conclude that such a view
is neither stated nor implied in the announcement, but that, on
the contrary, its reference is to the future.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(c) Reasons for regarding Lk. i. 34 f. as a Later Insertion</head>

<p>
Having sought to give their full force and proper meaning
to the two passages, Lk. i. 30-3 and Lk. i. 34 f., we may now
consider the arguments which can be advanced in favour of
regarding the latter passage as an interpolation. In respect
of these arguments, there is far from general agreement among
those who are at one in the conclusion reached. But the
significant fact is not the diversity of opinion as regards the
mode of proof, but the agreement of so many scholars in holding
the passage to be a later insertion.<note place='foot'>E.g. Cheyne, Conybeare, Grill, Harnack, Hillmann, Holtzmann, Loisy,
Montefiore, Pfleiderer, N. Schmidt, Schmiedel, Usener, Völter, J. Weiss.
On the other side are Hilgenfeld, Clemen, Gunkel, Chase, Stanton, Orr, Box,
Knowling.</note> The arguments we shall
examine are not equally cogent, and, as in the first part of the
present chapter, we shall call attention to their limitations as
well as to the points in which they are strong. We shall also
treat the case entirely apart from the results suggested in the
first half of our inquiry. Those results, if valid, set up a presupposition
against Lk. i. 34 f. But it seems much the best not
to avail ourselves of such an argument, but rather to consider
the passage in itself and in relation to its context. If in this
way we find reasonable grounds for considering Lk. i. 34 f. to be
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
a later insertion, we have then a double series of arguments
converging on one conclusion.
</p>

<p>
(1) The first point to be considered is that <hi rend='italic'>verse 36 follows
naturally after verse 33</hi>. As we have seen, in verses 30-3
we have an angelic announcement to Mary to the effect that
she is to give birth to a son who is destined to become the
Messiah. He will be called <q>the Son of the Most High</q>, and
to him the Lord God will give <q>the throne of his father David</q>.
To this message, it may be said, verses 36 and 37 form a fitting
sequel. They add the assurance that <q>no word from God shall
be void of power</q>, in proof of which it is declared that Mary's
kinswoman, Elisabeth, is shortly to bear a son in her old age.
The whole speech (Lk. i. 30-3, 36, 37) is a consistent passage,
and in relation to it the words of Mary in verse 38&mdash;<q>Behold,
the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy
word</q>&mdash;are a natural and fitting reply. Canon Box, in the
article already cited, questions this view. <q>There would be
nothing extraordinary</q>, he says <q>in Mary's conceiving a son as
Joseph's wife</q>&mdash;nothing, that is to say, to require the sign
offered. But surely it is not a question of <q>conceiving a son</q>,
but of conceiving such a son, the long-promised Messiah; and,
moreover, the ratification of so great a promise by means of
a miracle is a commonplace of OT. thought. It is not suggested,
of course, that this argument proves Lk. i. 34 f. to be
an interpolation. That a section runs smoothly when a particular
passage within it is excised, is no proof that that passage
is not original. This last conclusion must be established on the
ground of other arguments. If, however, in the present instance,
other arguments carry weight, then the fact that verse 36 can
be connected easily and naturally with verse 33 becomes of
very great importance, and it is for that reason that we introduce
it here.
</p>

<p>
(2) We take a really decisive step when we instance what
already has been found, namely that <hi rend='italic'>verse 34 follows quite
unnaturally upon Lk. i. 30-3</hi>. We have seen that Mary's question
implies the announcement of an immediate conception, and
we have failed to find any such announcement in the angel's
words. There is thus a complete difference of point of view
in the two passages. No possible ground is provided in the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
angelic announcement for the objection raised in verse 34. It
is difficult, therefore, to deny the suggestion that Mary's question
already implies a knowledge of what is told for the first
time in verse 35. But this view, if we accept it, is to say that
Mary's question could not possibly have been present to the
mind of Mary in the connexion in which it stands; it was
the last question she would have thought of asking. The question
can only have been put into her mouth by one who already
knew of the Virgin Birth, and wished to introduce that doctrine
into a context in which originally it did not appear. On the
interpretation which we have given to Lk. i. 30-3 and Lk. i.
34 f., this conclusion is inevitable, unless we prefer to find in
St. Luke an utter inconsecutiveness of thought which does him
no credit as writer, and which neither of his works justify us in
attributing to him.
</p>

<p>
(3) We are unable to attach the same force to the contention
that verse 35 is followed unnaturally by verses 36 and 37 (so
Schmiedel), though this view has something to be said for it.
Verse 35 announces the virgin birth of the promised Messiah,
a doctrine which is not found in Jewish literature and tradition,
and for which, therefore, the mind of Mary must have been
utterly unprepared.<note place='foot'>But see W. C. Allen, ICC., St. Mt., p. 10 and p. 19.</note> As the section now stands, the statement
of verses 36 and 37 is added as a sign that what has just been
promised will surely come to pass. This sign, we have already
argued, would be quite natural, according to OT. modes of
thought, as authenticating such a message as that given in Lk.
i. 30-3. But can we say this in reference to the promise of
a virgin birth? To the modern mind at least the argument
seems faulty and unconvincing. Mary is bidden to accept as
the divine promise what is so remarkable as to be otherwise
unknown to her, on the ground of what is certainly remarkable
but familiar to her mind and outlook. In truth, this seems
a remarkable argument with which to credit an angel! At the
same time, it has to be admitted that such an objection may
be too stringent, and that it may not allow sufficiently for
ancient modes of thought, according to which the argument
from the less to the greater is by no means uncommon. For
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
this reason the present writer would not feel confident in
pressing the argument sketched above.<note place='foot'>Some scholars, including Häcker, Spitta, and Montefiore, bring verses
36, 37 within the interpolation. Schmiedel's presentation of the argument
stated above is as follows: <q>Moreover, the case of Elizabeth to which the
angel points in v. 36 is no evidence of the possibility of a supernatural conception;
it has evidential value only if what has happened to Elizabeth is
more wonderful than what is being promised to Mary&mdash;namely that she, in the
way of nature, is to become the mother of the Messiah</q> (EB., col. 2957).</note>
</p>

<p>
(4) A much stronger argument calls attention to <hi rend='italic'>the similarity
between Mary's question and that of Zacharias (Lk. i. 18), and
the difference with which they are treated by the angel</hi>. <q>Mary's
speech expresses doubt of the truth of the angel's message, and
yet she is not so much as blamed, whilst Zacharias is actually
punished for a like doubt (i. 20)</q>.<note place='foot'>Schmiedel, op. cit., col. 2957. To the same effect J. Estlin Carpenter
(op. cit., p. 487 f.). Compare Lk. i. 45 where Mary is praised for her faith,
and see Moffatt, INT., p. 268 f.</note> The presumption is that
the two cases do not emanate from the same cycle of tradition.
The force of this argument depends, of course, upon the way
in which we interpret Lk. i. 34. It is true that we have no
indication of the tone in which the question is asked, beyond
the words themselves and the sentences which follow; but quite
sufficient is given to indicate the presence of doubt. The point
is not merely one of subjective valuation. This will appear
if we consider Plummer's view, which is quite different from
Schmiedel's. <q>She does not ask for <emph>proof</emph>, as Zacharias did
(ver. 18); and only in the form of the words does she ask as
to the mode of accomplishment. Her utterance is little more
than an involuntary expression of amazement.... It is clear
that she does not doubt the fact promised, nor for a moment
suppose that her child is to be the child of Joseph</q> (op. cit.,
p. 24). In weighing this opinion, it should be noticed that it
refers only to the words, Πῶς ἔσται τοῦτο? We may readily
agree that if all that Mary had said were, <q>How shall this be?</q>,
we should be unable to contest this view. But to divide Mary's
question in this way is not permissible. The second part,
<q>seeing I know not a man</q>, clearly determines the first, and
debars us from viewing it as merely <q>an involuntary expression
of amazement</q>. The presence of doubt, we think, must be
conceded, though it is less marked than in the case of Zacharias.
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<p>
This view, moreover, is supported by the fact that, in the narrative
as it stands, an explanation follows, which is also confirmed
by a sign. Since, as Plummer says, Mary, unlike Zacharias,
does not ask for proof, we need not object that she is not
<q>punished.</q> And it is just possible that we make the parallelism
too rigid if we lay stress on the fact that <q>she is not so much
as blamed</q>. It is rather the <q>eulogium</q> of Lk. i. 45 (<q>Blessed
is she that believed</q>) which presents the difficulty. It is true
that, in the narrative as we have it now, Mary believes ultimately
(verse 38), but Lk. i. 45 seems rather to belong to a narrative
in which Mary believes from the first. We conclude that the
present argument gives real support to the view that Lk. i. 34 f.
belongs to a source distinct from its context.
</p>

<p>
(5) A fifth argument dwells on <emph>the different senses</emph> in which
Divine Sonship is predicated of the promised child in verse 32
as compared with verse 35. As we have seen, the term υἱὸς
᾿Υψίστου in verse 32 is purely Messianic. But in verse 35 the
expression υἱὸς θεοῦ must be given a very different meaning.
It is in consequence of (διὸ καί) the divine overshadowing that
the child is to be called <q>Son of God</q>. Here, to quote Dr. J.
Estlin Carpenter, the term denotes <q>not official adoption, but
actual origin</q>, and, with the same writer, we must conclude that
verse 35 <q>is thus a doublet of verses 31, 32 on another plane</q>
(op. cit., p. 487).<note place='foot'>Cf. Lobstein, <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Christ</hi>, p. 67.</note> It is more difficult to decide whether the
difference supports the theory of interpolation. We cannot shut
out the possibility that two diverse types of Sonship might have
been attributed by St. Luke to the same speaker at the same
time of writing. But, having said this, we may observe that it
is certainly much easier to suppose, and is much more probable,
that they belong to different periods of reflection, and are the
product (or deposit) of different traditions. This argument, then,
may be said to lean in the direction of the theory of interpolation,
but, for the reason given above, we should hesitate to urge
it, if it stood alone.
</p>

<p>
(6) We have lastly to look at the vexed question of the
Davidic descent. It is safe to say that, if we had not Lk. i. 34 f.
in the Gospel as it stands to-day, we should have no ground for
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
regarding Mary as of Davidic descent. It is the presence of these
verses that makes possible that inference in verse 32, where, in
addressing Mary, the angel speaks of David as the forefather of
the promised child. It is surely a remarkable fact that a point
so vital to St. Luke's narrative as the Davidic descent of Mary
should be introduced in so incidental a manner. Our wonder is
increased when we observe that St. Luke is at great pains to
assure Theophilus of the Davidic descent of Joseph. In ii. 4 it
is said that Joseph was <q><hi rend='italic'>of the house and family of David</hi></q>; not
a word is said of Mary's descent. It is true that the Sin. Syr.
reads, <q>because they were both of the house of David</q>; but this
does not naturally fit into the structure of the sentence, is unsupported
elsewhere, and is accepted by no one; it clearly
represents an attempt to remove a difficulty. In. i. 27 it is also
said that Joseph was <q><hi rend='italic'>of the house of David</hi></q>. The phrase cannot
be construed with the word <q>virgin</q>, which occurs earlier in the
sentence, in view of the fact that after ἐξ οἴκου Δανείδ St. Luke
resumes the thread of the story by saying <q>and the virgin's name
was Mary</q>; otherwise, he would have continued (so Schmiedel,
op. cit., col. 2957), <q>and her name was Mary</q>. It is not easy
indeed to resist Schmiedel's further contention that the phrasing
of the sentence expressly forbids our ascribing the Davidic
descent to Mary, though the opinion is put forward with greater
confidence than seems justified. The one passage in which
St. Luke directly refers to the family of Mary is dubious. In
i. 36 Elisabeth is said to be <q><hi rend='italic'>the kinswoman</hi></q> of Mary, and we
know from i. 5 that Elisabeth was <q><hi rend='italic'>of the daughters of Aaron</hi></q>,
which seems to imply that Mary too was of Levitical descent.
But as the precise nature of the relationship is not stated, we
cannot say, with Schmiedel, Usener, and others, that this is so.
Nevertheless, the broad fact remains that apart from an inference,
which itself depends on Lk. i. 34 f., we have no grounds for believing
Mary to be a descendant of David. St. Luke undoubtedly
believes Jesus to be of Davidic descent; he carefully shows
Joseph to be of that descent; he gives us no reason to suppose,
that, like the author of the First Gospel, he traced the descent
of Jesus through Joseph as His <emph>legal</emph> father; and yet, in spite of
all this, he has left the vital question of the Davidic descent of
Mary at the mercy of an inference! If he knows Mary to be
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
a descendant of David, why does he not say so explicitly? We
have a right to ask the question, which is neither captious nor
unfair. No one has yet answered it satisfactorily, except in the
answer that St. Luke had no tradition of the Davidic descent of
Mary at his disposal, that he traced the descent of Jesus through
Joseph as His real father, that this is the true interpretation of
verse 32, and that Lk. i. 34 f. is a later insertion, which has
imposed on verse 32 a sense which originally it did not bear.
<hi rend='italic'>Regard Lk. i. 34 f. as a later insertion, and all the facts alleged
by St. Luke about the Davidic descent fall into intelligible order</hi>;
refuse to do this, and they remain in inexplicable confusion.
</p>

<p>
When we consider the cumulative force of the preceding arguments,
it becomes impossible for us to think that Lk. i. 34 f. was
written at the same time, and from the same point of view, as
the context in which it now stands; it is clearly a later insertion.
With some reason we may hesitate to say that verse 36 does not
follow naturally upon verse 35, and we may speculate whether
two diverse conceptions of Sonship may not be held in the same
mind at the same time of writing. But when we ponder the
question of the Davidic descent; when we compare verse 34 with
Lk. i. 18 ff.; when we observe the natural coherence of Lk. i.
30-3 and Lk. i. 36-8, and the radical difference in point of view
between verses 34, 35 and the angelic announcement; when, in
short, we have a narrative, which, if Lk. i. 34 f. was present from
the first, ought to be dominated by those verses, but on the
contrary does not seem to be influenced by them; we are compelled
to conclude that the suspected verses represent a later
insertion in the Gospel.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Summary and Conclusion</head>

<p>
We are in a position now to conclude from the foregoing
investigation that <hi rend='italic'>the Virgin Birth is not an original element in
the Third Gospel</hi>. This conclusion has been reached by two
lines of argument which confirm and strengthen each other.
We have seen that the one passage which unmistakably asserts
the doctrine is a later insertion. Independently of this, statements
have been noted in chapters i and ii, which receive no
natural and satisfactory explanation on the assumption that
St. Luke wrote his narrative with a knowledge of the miracle
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
presupposed. In the first part of this chapter we expressly
refrained from pressing the view that these points in themselves
absolutely forbid this assumption. But, obviously, now that
we have found Lk. i. 34 f. to be a later insertion, the force of
these difficulties is greatly increased. We are now entitled to say
that the opinion which does least honour to St. Luke is the view
that he has written cc. i, ii, while knowing of the Virgin Birth.
We have to remember that not only is the Virgin Birth itself
a stupendous thought, but that, if known to St. Luke, it cannot
have been known long, and must therefore have preserved the
freshness of its wonder. Can we, then, suppose that, while under
the sway of a presupposition so despotic as this, he would
straightway proceed to use such expressions as <q>the parents</q>,
<q>his parents</q>, <q>his father and his mother</q>; that, without qualification,
he would speak of <q>their purification</q>; that he would
represent them astonished at the words of Simeon, and mystified
by the bearing and speech of Jesus at Jerusalem? Is it credible,
in short, that he should have fallen into the very ambiguities and
inconsistencies, which presumably he would be anxious to avoid,
and which without the slightest difficulty he could have avoided?
Even if we should still hesitate to answer these questions in the
negative, our conclusion, that originally the Gospel lacked the
references to the Virgin Birth which we now find in it, leaves us
no other option.
</p>

<p>
It should be observed that the arguments we have employed
in the present chapter do not compel us to take the view that
St. Luke never at any time taught the Virgin Birth. They are
satisfied if we can suppose that he had no knowledge of the
doctrine when Lk. i, ii was first written. To say that i. 34 f. is
a correction, inserted by a redactor or reader, whose name we do
not know, but who is not St. Luke, is to take two steps where we
have ground for one only. All that our study entitles us to claim
is that the Virgin Birth belongs to a later stratum in the Third
Gospel. More than this we cannot say, until we have made
a thorough linguistic and textual examination of Lk. i. 34 f., and
this must be our next task.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. St. Luke and the Virgin Birth</head>

<p>
While, in the preceding chapter, we concluded that the Virgin
Birth is a later stratum in the Third Gospel, we were unable to
say to whose hand its presence is due. There was nothing to
show that St. Luke could never at any time have known of the
doctrine, but only that he could not have known of it at the time
when he first drafted and wrote his Gospel. We are free, then,
to make a new beginning, and to ask: <hi rend='italic'>Did St. Luke teach the
Virgin Birth?</hi>
</p>

<p>
The question is most conveniently treated by discussing the
authorship of Lk. i. 34 f. As we have seen, this is the crucial
passage. If we can believe St. Luke himself to have written
these verses, we must also attribute to his pen the words, <q>as was
supposed</q> in iii. 23; in a word, we must conclude that he taught
the Virgin Birth of Jesus, and we must leave the question, how
this result is to be co-ordinated with those reached in the previous
chapter, to be considered later.
</p>

<p>
That St. Luke and no other did write these verses, is the
considered view of the present writer. There are two lines of
argument which converge in this direction. The first argument
is <emph>textual</emph>, but it is more than a matter of weighing documents;
the second is <emph>linguistic</emph> and stylistic. Neither is completely
conclusive in itself, and, when taken together, they do not
admit of a result so stringent as rigid demonstration. They are
complementary each to the other. Either would be weakened in
force in the absence of the other, but their agreement is sufficient
to establish a result for which a very high degree of probability
can justly be claimed.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Lk. i. 34 f. and the Textual Question</head>

<p>
It is well known that no exception to Lk. i. 34 f. can be taken
on strictly <emph>textual</emph> grounds. The external evidence for the
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
passage is practically complete. The sole exception, which only
serves to throw into relief the overwhelming mass of positive
evidence, is found in the Old Latin MS. known as b, which
substitutes i. 38 for i. 34 and omits verse 38 after verse 37.<note place='foot'>Cf. Moffatt (INT., p. 268 n.): <q>The substitution ... is too slender a
basis, and may have been accidental, whilst the alleged omission of 34-5 from
the <hi rend='italic'>Protevangelium Iacobi</hi> breaks down upon examination</q> (cf. Headlam's
discussion with Conybeare in the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> for March-April 1903).</note>
</p>

<p>
In Great Britain, a generation ago and less, this weight of
external evidence would have been thought sufficient to settle
the question, and there are probably very many scholars who
would still take this view. But within recent years a change has
come to be discernible among leading theological writers on the
general question of attestation. Much more than in former times
it is now recognized that during the first half of the second
century the text of the New Testament, and especially that of
the Gospels, was subject to rather free handling, and the possibility
has to be faced that interpolations may have crept into the
text in places where formerly the external attestation would have
been thought sufficiently strong.
</p>

<p>
Dr. George Milligan<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The New Testament Documents, their Origin and early History</hi>
(Croall Lectures, 1911-12). 1913.</note> traces the danger of textual corruption
to which the New Testament writings were exposed to a threefold
cause, (i) the material upon which the autographs were
written, (ii) the employment of non-professional scribes, (iii) the
fact that the thought of the need of absolute verbal reproduction
was strange to early scribes. The last named fact led, not only
to attempts to improve the grammar and to add <q>explanatory
words</q>, but also to the insertion <q>even of deliberate changes in
the supposed interests of historic or dogmatic truth</q>. Milligan
instances the case of Dionysius of Corinth who, <q>in view of the
circulation of his epistles in a falsified form</q>, is found <q>naïvely
comforting himself with the thought that the same fate had befallen
the Scriptures</q> (p. 179 n.). <q>The general result</q>, Dr. Milligan
concludes, <q>is, that instead of assigning textual corruption to
a comparatively late date ... everything rather points to the
conclusion that, the nearer we get to the original manuscripts,
the greater were the dangers to which their text was exposed</q>
(p. 180).
</p>

<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>

<p>
In view of this position, it is important to ask whether interpolations
may not exist which have left no trace whatever of
their origin in the abundant documentary evidence we possess.
A representative statement of this view may be found in the
words of Dr. James Moffatt (INT., p. 36 f.): <q>Even where the
extant text does not suggest any break, the possibility of interpolations
cannot be denied outright; the distance between the
oldest MSS., or even the oldest versions, and the date of composition
leaves ample room for changes to have taken place in
the interval between the autograph and the earliest known text</q>
(p. 38). <q>The extent of interpolations varied from a word or two
to a paragraph, and the motives for it varied equally from
sinister to naïve</q> (p. 38).<note place='foot'>Cf. also Burkitt (GHT., p. 11): <q>... the text of the Gospels, the actual
wording, and even to some extent the contents, were not treated during the
second century with particular scrupulosity by the Christians who preserved
and canonized them. There is nothing in the way which Christians treated
the books of the New Testament during the first four centuries that corresponds
with the care bestowed by the Jews upon the Hebrew Scriptures from
the time of Aquiba onwards.</q> See also Blass, <hi rend='italic'>Philology of the Gospels</hi>,
p. 72 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
One argument in favour of this view may be drawn from the
state of the existing MSS. and versions. The multitudinous
variations which occur in these documents cannot be explained
without admitting the free treatment which has been mentioned,
and which was natural at a time when the Gospels were not yet
looked upon as <q>sacred books</q>. In large measure such additions
as we find were drawn from floating Christian tradition, and in
many cases, e.g. the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pericope adulteriae</foreign>, they probably reflect
historic fact.<note place='foot'>Cf. Sanday (<hi rend='italic'>Inspiration</hi>, 2nd Ed., pp. 295-8): <q>Possessors of copies did not
hesitate to add little items of tradition, often oral, and in some cases perhaps
written, which reached them</q> (295). See also J. H. Moulton (<hi rend='italic'>From Egyptian
Rubbish Heaps</hi>, pp. 97 ff.), and an article in the <hi rend='italic'>Classical Review</hi> for March
1915 on <q>The Primitive Text of the Gospels and Acts</q>; J. A. Robinson, <hi rend='italic'>Study
of the Gospels</hi>, p. 24 f.</note> Nevertheless, they are not genuine parts of the
New Testament. The further argument is an inference: if such
variations from such causes occur in the MSS. and versions we
possess, may there not be interpolations of which we have no
external indication in the existing texts?
</p>

<p>
Stated in this way the question invites an affirmative answer,
but there are other factors which have yet to be considered. As
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
a matter of fact, there is little profit in a broad and general discussion.
We touch the heart of the problem only when we
consider the <emph>types</emph> or classes into which such insertions might
conceivably fall. On the whole it is best, even if only for purposes
of argument, to admit the possibility that insertions
unmarked by signs of textual variation exist, and to ask: Of
what character may we suppose these insertions to be, and can
we define any limits within which they are more probable than
others? In particular, is Lk. i. 34 f. a likely or probable instance?
It is obvious that hard and fast lines cannot be drawn in individual
cases. Nevertheless, it ought to be possible to say
whether or not a passage like the one we are considering is, or
is not, the work of a redactor.
</p>

<p>
Those instances of insertions, <emph>where textual variations can be
cited</emph>, supply us with the safest criterion for other suspected cases.
Of these instances many, as we have seen, were drawn from the
floating tradition of the Christian communities. An interesting
case is suggested by Dr. J. H. Moulton (<hi rend='italic'>From Egyptian Rubbish
Heaps</hi>, p. 101 f.). He traces the saying, <q>Father, forgive them;
for they know not what they do</q>, to the reminiscences of the
centurion who was present at the death of Jesus. <q>The words
are not in Luke's original Gospel, but as the great Professor Hort
said in regard to the fact that these words cannot be textually defended,
<q>Few if any words in all the Gospels bear more intrinsic
witness to the truth of what they relate than these</q></q> (p. 103).
On general grounds, it may very well be, that similar items of
tradition have found their way into the existing texts, leaving the
surface of the textual stream unruffled. But it is clear that, in
any suspected case, the insertion could be the act of the author
himself and not the reader. If the latter really is the case, the
insertion must have been made very early, and must have been
of such a kind as not to awaken comment or dissent.
</p>

<p>
A second kind of insertions may possibly be found in <emph>explanatory
words or phrases</emph>, introduced with the intention of
bringing out the original writer's meaning. We may take as an
instance Rom. iv. 1 (<q>What then shall we say that Abraham,
our forefather according to the flesh, hath found?</q> εὐρηκέναι),
where Sanday and Headlam say that they <q>regard the omission
of εὐρηκέναι as probable with WH. text Tr. RV. marg.</q> (ICC.,
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
Rom., p. 99).<note place='foot'>Cf. also Hawkins (HS., 2nd Ed., pp. 152 and 197), who instances <q>additions of
various kinds which may be regarded as probably editorial</q> (p. 197) in the
Second and Third Gospels. See also Moffatt (INT.), under heading <q>Glosses
in NT. text</q>, p. 641, where references are given to cases treated in the body
of the work.</note> In this case, however, as in so many others, the gloss,
if gloss it is, is reflected in the textual evidence. Nevertheless, the
possibility may be allowed, that such glosses exist even where
variants cannot be cited. In these cases, however, it is clear that
the insertions must have been very early and very happy, and
that in specific cases their presence can rarely be conceded with
complete confidence.
</p>

<p>
Yet another class of interpolations may possibly be found in
certain passages in the Gospels which later conditions obtaining
within the Christian Church have shaped. That later experience
did interpret the words of Jesus and give the sense of them in
its own terms, need not be questioned. But it should always be
remembered that in any suspected case, the process may well
have been complete by the time that the Evangelists wrote, and
that the passage is not an interpolation at all. There are very
good grounds for this opinion even in cases in which variations in
rendering can be cited from patristic and other sources, as, for
example, in the case of the Great Commission in Mt. xxviii. 19.
This fact makes it all the more difficult to concede an interpolation
where the textual record is unbroken, though again the
possibility that such cases do exist may well be left open.
</p>

<p>
The cases just considered help us when we come to think of
<emph>doctrinal modifications</emph>. As regards these, it is important to draw
again a distinction which has been already made. We must
distinguish, on the one hand, between those instances of doctrinal
modification that are due to the Evangelists themselves, and
which are in no sense interpolations, and, on the other hand, those
which may subsequently have been made by later scribes or
readers. Cases of the former kind unquestionably occur in the
Gospels. We have only to examine the way in which the First
and Third Evangelists have treated the Second Gospel, which
lay before them, to be assured of this. Alterations, e.g., are
made out of a sense of reverence for the person of Jesus
(cf. Allen, ICC., St. Mt., p. xxxi f.). Mt. xix. 17 (<q>Why askest
thou me concerning that which is good?</q>), and the changes which
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
Mk. vi. 5 f. has been subjected to, both in Mt. and Lk., will serve
as illustrations.
</p>

<p>
Modifications of this kind are not, however, the sort we have
specially in mind. It is the second type, those which are interpolations
proper, that we have particularly to consider. The
existence of these has frankly to be admitted. It is beyond
question that doctrinal insertions were introduced into the text
of the Gospels by later scribes and readers. The one case of
Mt. i. 16 is proof positive of this (see pp. 105 ff.). If the opinion,
that the original ending of our Second Gospel was deliberately
suppressed, is correct, Mk. xvi. 9-20 may be cited as another
instance.<note place='foot'>It may, however, have been accidentally lost. See Moffatt, INT., pp. 238 ff,
where the question is discussed.</note> An important qualification, however, requires to be
made. In the two cases mentioned there is a conflict of textual
evidence, and, as regards the latter, the objections are reinforced
by the internal evidence, arising from the vocabulary, the style,
and the subject-matter. The present writer must needs conclude
that <hi rend='italic'>the presence of textual variation is an almost necessary condition
in the case of a doctrinal insertion</hi>. It is more difficult to
say how far this requirement should be pressed in the other types
of interpolation which have been mentioned, but as regards
doctrinal modifications the test is thoroughly legitimate. Without
going so far as to pronounce it absolutely impossible, we may
say that <hi rend='italic'>the theory, that doctrinal insertions may exist where the
extant texts show no break, is improbable in the extreme</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In taking this view, we are not confined to the plea of the
early and abundant nature of textual evidence, or to the effect of
controversy in preserving the purity of the text, though these
are arguments of very great weight. A sufficiently decisive factor
is <hi rend='italic'>the character of the existing textual variants</hi>.<note place='foot'>In this connexion it is important to remember that even early orthographic
peculiarities have been accurately preserved. <q>I have been much
struck by the number of cases in which the old uncials preserve spellings
which can be proved current in the time of the autographs, but obsolete long
before the fourth century. Faithful in minutiae, they might reasonably be
expected to be faithful also in greater matters</q> (J. H. Moulton, in an
article in the <hi rend='italic'>Classical Review</hi>, March, 1915, reprinted in <hi rend='italic'>The Christian
Religion in the Study and the Street</hi>, 1919, p. 153). See also the <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena</hi>,
pp. 42-56.</note> If authentic
items of Jesus-tradition and <q>explanatory words and phrases</q>
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
have not been able to enter the textual stream unnoticed, can we
suppose that doctrinal modifications have breasted the waters
without leaving so much as a ripple? If even an insertion
like <q>Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do</q>
has not been able successfully to conceal itself, can we believe
Lk. i. 34 f. to have succeeded in doing this? Can we think that,
like Melchizedek, the passage is without father, mother, genealogy
and beginning of life? In asking these questions we need to
recall the character of the section. It is such as radically to
transform the standpoint of the chapters in which it occurs. It
speaks of matters which, for a considerable time at least, were
not known among the mass of Christian believers, and were
never accepted by some. To suppose, then, that it is a non-Lukan
doctrinal interpolation, is a flight of faith, for which those
who can make it should receive the credit that is due, but of
which the present writer must confess that he is not capable.
</p>

<p>
While, however, we conclude that the theory we are discussing
is manifestly improbable, we have admitted our inability to pronounce
it impossible in any shape and form. Provided we agree
that the Third Gospel never circulated without Lk. i. 34 f., there
is one point where the passage might have entered as an insertion,
and that is in the interval before circulation. But even here it is
difficult to suppose that the passage was added by some one other
than St. Luke himself. In our entire ignorance of the circumstances
under which the Gospel came to have a wider circulation,
we cannot say that this supposition is inadmissible. It has a bare
possibility in its favour, but not more. If a linguistic examination
of the passage gave a result unfavourable to Lukan authorship,
the possibility would become more significant. But if the contrary
proves to be the case, then it becomes so remote as to be
unworthy of serious consideration. It is because of this position
that we have described the present argument as being not completely
conclusive in itself, and the one line of reasoning as
complementary to the other. Quite apart, however, from the
linguistic argument, the difficulties which the theory of non-Lukan
interpolation has to face on textual grounds are formidable.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Linguistic and Stylistic Examination of Lk. i. 34 f</head>

<p>
Our second task is to make <hi rend='italic'>a linguistic and stylistic examination
of Lk. i. 34 f.</hi> At the beginning of the last chapter we drew
attention to the importance of the test. It cannot be too strongly
affirmed that any hypothesis of interpolation, which does not
take account of the linguistic characteristics of the passage, is
premature; indeed, it may easily turn out to be a rather glaring
case of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non sequitur</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
It is precisely the linguistic test which we miss in the arguments
of those who claim that Lk. i. 34 f. was not written by
St. Luke. Usually it is thought enough to argue an incompatibility
between this passage and its context, and straightway
to assign the former to the pen of an unknown redactor. We
may illustrate this method from the two articles in the <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Biblica</hi> to which reference has been made. In the article
on <q>Mary</q>, Schmiedel says (col. 2956): <q>It has to be pointed out
that even in Lk. i only two verses&mdash;vv. 34 f.&mdash;contain the idea
of the virgin birth clearly and effectively; and these disturb the
connexion so manifestly that we are compelled to regard them as
a later insertion</q>. The only argument of a linguistic character is
the remark: <q>Note, further, that apart from i. 34 ἐπεί (<q>since</q>)
is not met with either in the third gospel or in Acts</q>. Usener
writes (col. 3349): <q>To Joh. Hillmann (JPT. 17, 221 ff.) belongs
the merit of having conclusively shown that the two verses in
Lk. (i. 34 f.), the only verses in the Third Gospel in which the
supernatural birth of Jesus of the Virgin Mary is stated, are
incompatible with the entire representation of the rest of chaps, i
and ii, and <hi rend='italic'>thus must have been interpolated by a redactor</hi></q>.<note place='foot'>The italics are ours.</note> It
is theories of this kind that we have in view when we say (p. 47)
that to state such a conclusion is to take two steps where there
is ground for one only.
</p>

<p>
The importance of the linguistic argument is manifest in such
works as Sir John C. Hawkins's <hi rend='italic'>Horae Synopticae</hi> (2nd ed., 1909)
and Dr. W. K. Hobart's <hi rend='italic'>Medical Language of St. Luke</hi> (1882).
It has also received great emphasis in the books in which
Harnack has sought to prove the Lukan authorship and
early date of the Acts, viz. <hi rend='italic'>Luke the Physician</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Acts of
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
the Apostles</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Date of the Acts and of the Synoptic
Gospels</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It may not be without value to ask how far the linguistic
argument can take us. We may certainly lay down the broad
proposition that arguments in favour of an interpolation ought
to be supported by the linguistic facts; provided, of course,
that the suspected passage is susceptible of the linguistic test.
We do not forget that a passage may be of such a neutral
character as not to admit of that test. In that case we have
to be content with other available arguments. Where, however,
the linguistic test can be applied, and where the result is strongly
favourable to the genuineness of the passage, that, assuredly, is
a very serious objection for the theory of interpolation to face.
It becomes especially formidable, if we can bring forward no
evidence to prove an anachronism, or if we can allege no real
textual objections. Under such circumstances, indeed, we may
well adopt the rule that, in cases of this kind, we have not to
do with the insertion of a redactor; unless, of course, we have
good reason for saying that the interpolator has entered deeply
into the original writer's style. The view here taken does not
mean that all objections to a passage are sufficiently met if
we can state a strong linguistic case on the other side. We
shall have reason to take up this point again (p. 69). For the
present it is sufficient to say that each kind of argument must
be given its own particular force. In the case of a passage
where objections arising from context and subject-matter cannot
be gainsaid, we must conclude that the passage is of later date
than its context, but not more. In a case where the facts of
vocabulary, style, and subject-matter are sufficiently favourable,
and no textual difficulties forbid, we must ascribe the passage
to the original writer. In a case, finally, where both kinds of
conditions occur, we must suppose that the passage was afterwards
inserted by the writer himself into the body of his own
work. Clearly, then, the linguistic examination of a suspected
passage is a matter of great importance. In the case of Lk. i. 34 f.,
it is not too much to say that it is a task as necessary as it is
neglected.
</p>

<p>
It may be objected that the passage is one of two verses only,
and that, in consequence, it is much too brief to allow of satisfactory
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
results. On the other hand, it should be remembered
that the thirty-seven words of the section include several interesting
phrases and points of construction, which are so important
in matters of this kind. Moreover, in the case of St. Luke, we
are dealing with a writer who has a very distinctive style.<note place='foot'>Plummer, ICC., St. Lk., pp. xlviii ff.; Harnack, <hi rend='italic'>Luke the Physician</hi>, p. 104 f.;
Moffatt, INT., p. 278 f.; Hawkins, HS., 2nd Ed., pp. 15 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
Harnack has recognized the force of the linguistic argument
in the case of two verses (thirty-one words). These are the
last two verses of the Acts. After remarking that, so far as he
knows, it has never been questioned that these words come from
the author of the complete work, though they have the appearance
of being a postscript, he continues: <q>Moreover, in content
and in form they agree so closely with the Lukan style that
from this point of view strong arguments can be produced in
favour of their genuineness</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Date of Acts</hi>, &amp;c., p. 94). In a footnote
he adds the linguistic argument. This is quite enough for
our purpose. It is true that the genuineness of Lk. i. 34 f. is
questioned by many (on other than linguistic and textual
grounds). Nevertheless, the field is open for inquiry as to
whether <q>in content and form they agree so closely with the
Lukan style that from this point of view strong arguments can
be produced in favour of their genuineness</q>. After all, the
length of the passage is not the vital consideration, but its
<emph>character</emph> (which may, or may not, be more striking than that
of a much longer section); and this is something which can come
out only after actual examination.
</p>

<p>
We turn, then, to the linguistic examination of Lk. i. 34 f.
According to the Westcott and Hort text, the passage is as
follows:
</p>

<p>
34. εἶπεν δὲ Μαριὰμ πρὸς τὸν ἄγγελον Πῶς ἔσται τοῦτο, ἐπεὶ
ἄνδρα οὐ γινώσκω; 35. καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ἄγγελος εἶπεν αὐτῇ
Πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ σέ, καὶ δύναμις Ὑψίστου ἐπισκιάσει
σοι· διὸ καὶ τὸ γεννώμενον ᾿ἍΓΙΟΝ ΚΛΗΘΉΣΕΤΑΙ, υἱὸς θεοῦ.
</p>

<p>
In treating these words, we shall not follow the order in
which they occur, but the order of their importance for our
investigation.<note place='foot'><p>There is a well-known difficulty of punctuation in verse 35. Ought we
to put a comma, with WH., after κληθήσεται? If we do so, the subj. is τό
γεννώμενον, and ἅγιον is part of the predicate. If we omit the comma, the
whole phrase τὸ γεν. ἅγιον is the subj., and the pred. is κληθ. υἱὸς θ. (cf. RV.
marg.). Most critical editors of the Greek text omit the comma. It is
probable, as the WH. type shows, that Dr. Hort was influenced by his belief
that ἅγιον κληθ. went together as a quotation or reminiscence of the OT., and,
if the passage comes from St. Luke, this is a strong argument. On the other
hand, it can be argued that if the words are a Greek rendering of an Aramaic
phrase it is improbable, if not impossible, that the participle should stand
alone as the subj. It is not possible, of course, to settle the question by
appealing to manuscript authority, as the early MSS. were practically devoid
of punctuation marks. In our own case, we are unable to use either of the
arguments cited, since each rests upon the assumption of the Lukan origin of
Lk. i. 34 f., which is the very point we are discussing. While then we follow
the WH. text we have to leave the question of punctuation an open one. If
the comma should be omitted we lose the difficulty of τό γεννώμενον noted on
p. 61, and we lose also the argument from its construction, sketched on p. 64.
</p>
<p>
As, in the end, we claim that Lk. i. 34 f. comes from the hand of St. Luke,
we may perhaps be permitted to express a personal preference for the WH.
punctuation. St. Luke's admitted fondness for OT. phraseology points
strongly in this direction, while the theory of an original Aramaic document
gains no increased support, but rather the contrary, as time goes by. On the
one hand, Harnack has convincingly shown how much the Greek of
Lk. i, ii owes to St. Luke's craftsmanship (cf. <hi rend='italic'>Luke the Phys.</hi>, pp. 102 ff.), and,
on the other hand, the argument from <q>Semiticisms</q> becomes less cogent the
more we know of the papyri (cf. Moulton, <hi rend='italic'>Proleg.</hi>, pp. 13-18. See also
Gr. ii. 12-20). Aramaic oral tradition may underlie cc. i, ii, but the probability
is that the Greek of these chapters owes its OT. flavour to the more
or less deliberate attempt of St. Luke to create an appropriate archaic
atmosphere.</p></note> It is clear that the words fall into different
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
classes: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) according as they are neutral in character, that is
to say, of insufficient importance either way in deciding the
question; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) in so far as they create difficulty on the assumption
of Lukan authorship, and, to that extent, support the theory
of interpolation; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) in so far as they give clear support in favour
of Lukan origin.
</p>

<div>
<head>a.</head>

<p>
In the first class we may include the words: ἀνήρ, καὶ
ἀποκριθείς, πῶς, ἄγγελος, δύναμις, ἅγιος, εἶπεν with dat., υἱὸσ
θεοῦ, and perhaps even Πνεῦμα ἅγιον.
</p>

<p>
Every one of these words and phrases is well represented in
the Lukan writings, and in the case of some of them we get, on
investigation, remarkable results.<note place='foot'>The various computations are drawn from the <hi rend='italic'>Concordance to the Greek
Testament</hi> by Dr. W. F. Moulton and Dr. A. S. Geden. In the case of
St. Luke's Gospel words occurring in i. 34 f. are omitted. If these verses are
Lukan, this underestimates the Lukan evidence. It would, however, be
begging the question to include these verses in the present examination.
Quotations and doubtful cases (except where mentioned) are also omitted.</note>
</p>

<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>

<p>
Take the case of ἀνήρ. In the NT. it occurs 212 times, and
of these no less than 125 appear in St. Luke's works (26 in G.
and 99 in Acts), i.e. 58 per cent. Still more remarkable is the
result when we compare ἀνήρ and ἄνθρωπος. Whereas the other
Evangelists use ἄνθρωπος very frequently indeed (218 times),
they employ ἀνήρ only 20 times. St. Luke also (especially in
the Gospel) uses ἄνθρωπος frequently (93 times), but he has ἀνήρ
26 times (cf. Mt. 8 times, Mk. 4 times, Jn. 8 times). If we take
both Lukan writings, the usage of ἄνθρωπος and ἀνήρ is roughly
equal, whereas in the rest of the NT. it is as 9 is to 2. We can
say, therefore, that St. Luke shows a liking for ἀνήρ, whereas
Mt. Mk. and Jn. markedly prefer ἄνθρωπος. However, the word
is so common that we can lay no stress on the fact that it occurs
in i. 34, where the connexion demands it. We can only note its
congruity with a Lukan liking.
</p>

<p>
Καὶ ἀποκριθείς is also interesting, though not, of course, in
any way decisive. In Lk. the phrase occurs 14 times; in Mt. it
is found 6 times; in Mk. 8; never in the Fourth Gospel, and
never in the Acts. It occurs, that is to say, in those parts
of the New Testament in which sources, probably Aramaic,<note place='foot'>But cf. Dalman, <hi rend='italic'>Words of Jesus</hi>, p. 24, quoted by Moulton, <hi rend='italic'>Proleg.</hi>,
p. 131.</note> are
employed. This is in line with the view expressed by Moulton
and Milligan with regard to the aorist passive forms of the verb.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament</hi>, by Moulton and Milligan,
p. 65 a. See also the note at the foot of p. 131 in the <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena</hi>: <q>This
phrase ... occurs in the Semitic atmosphere alone....</q></note>
They say that they incline to the opinion that ἀπεκρίθην <q>belongs
only to early Hellenistic, whence it was taken by the LXX
translators to render a common Hebrew phrase, passing thence
into the narrative parts of NT. as a definite <q>Septuagintalism</q></q>.
It is in keeping with this view that καὶ ἀποκριθείς ... εἶπεν
should appear in that part of St. Luke's Gospel where most of
all we have reason to posit Semitic sources, whether oral or
documentary. As we have seen, half the record of this expression
in the New Testament, apart from Lk. i. 35, is in the
Third Gospel. The presence, then, of καὶ ἀποκριθείς in Lk. i. 35
is congruous with these facts; more, perhaps, we cannot say.
</p>

<p>
A word like πῶς has no bearing on our present investigation,
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
and the same is true of ἄγγελος, δύναμις (otherwise, however, of
δ. in combination with nouns, &amp;c., in the gen.), ἅγιος (very frequently
in Lk.), εἶπεν (with dat.),<note place='foot'>εἶπεν πρός and εἷπεν δέ (see later) are both strongly characteristic of
St. Luke's style, but εἶπεν with the dative is also very frequent. Taking the
two works together, εἶπεν πρός and εἶπεν with the dat. are almost equally
common (εἶπ. w. dat. having the greater number of instances). In the G. the
proportion of εἶπεν with the dat. to εἶπεν πρίς is 5 : 4. In Acts it is 4 : 5.</note> and υἱὸς θεοῦ.
</p>

<p>
Μαριάμ (of the mother of Jesus) occurs more often in Lk. than
in other NT. writers (9 times and probably 10 in the G., once
in Acts); the form Μαρία appears but once (ii. 19 is doubtful). In
Mk. Μαρία occurs once, Μαριάμ never; in Mt. we find Μαρία
3 times and Μαριάμ probably twice. The use of the form
Μαριάμ in i. 34 is therefore in agreement with St. Luke's usage,
but of course this does not preclude the hand of an interpolator,
since every instance of Μαριάμ (of the mother of Jesus) in the
Third Gospel occurs in the first two chapters.
</p>

<p>
As is well known, the phrase Πνεῦμα ἅγιον is very frequently
found in the Lukan writings. The percentage is as much as 60,
and out of the instances in the NT., where the phrase is anarthrous,
more than 50 per cent, are in St. Luke (G. and Acts). The
phrase is therefore very strongly Lukan. But perhaps we ought
not to include the phrase among those which tell strongly against
the theory of interpolation, since a redactor would easily and
naturally introduce it in the connexion in which it appears in i. 35.
<q>The new view was not an intruder from the sphere of heathen
mythology, but a logical conclusion from the belief that our
Lord was <hi rend='italic'>God's Son by the operation of the Holy Spirit</hi></q>
(Harnack's <hi rend='italic'>Date of Acts</hi>,<note place='foot'>The italics are his.</note> p. 144). We can say therefore that
Πνεῦμα ἅγιον is admirably in keeping with Lukan usage but
hardly more. The case is quite otherwise with the whole phrase,
Πνεῦμα ἅγ. ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ σέ, as we shall see.
</p>

<p>
Καλέω is also a word which might be considered here, for it is,
of course, a very common word. Having regard, however, to the
way in which it is used, it will be better to take it later.
</p>

<p>
Summing up our results thus far, we may say that we have
found nothing that is out of accord with Lukan usage. On the
other hand, indeed, every word and phrase we have examined
is well represented in St. Luke's writings. Nevertheless, the
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
words are common elsewhere, and in no case do they tell
decisively either way.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>b.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>We now come to words which present difficulties, less or greater,
on the assumption of Lukan authorship, and so far tell in favour
of the theory of interpolation.</hi> These are&mdash;ἐπεί, γινώσκω, and
perhaps τὸ γεννώμενον.
</p>

<p>
1. We introduce τὸ γεννώμενον here, because the expression, as
distinct from the construction, occurs nowhere else in Lk. As
a matter of fact it occurs nowhere else in the New Testament in
this form. The perfect passive participle, however, appears twice
in the Johannine writings: τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τ. σαρκὸς σάρξ
ἐστιν (Jn. iii. 6), and ὅτι πᾶν γεγεννημένον ἐκ τ. θεοῦ νικᾷ τ.
κόσμον (1 Jn. v. 4). What is more important is that there is a
close parallel to τὸ γεννώμενον in Mt. i. 30, which reads, τὸ γὰρ ἐν
αὐτῇ γεννηθὲν ἐκ πνεύματος ἐστιν ἁγίου. The complete clause
in Lk. runs, διὸ καὶ τὸ γεννώμενον ἅγιον κληθήσεται, υἱὸς θεοῦ.
</p>

<p>
It is certainly open to any one to argue that the passage in
Lk. is introduced by an interpolator who is under the influence
of Mt. i. 20. Why, however, while under that influence, he
should so far enter into Lukan usage as to introduce the Lukan
διὸ καί, and κληθήσεται, to say nothing of putting Πνεῦμα ἅγιον
into a different connexion in a characteristically Lukan phrase
(Π. ἅγ. ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ σέ. Cf. Acts i. 8 and see later), are
questions which it is not easy to answer. Assuredly there is not
much here to support the hypothesis of interpolation, and when
we consider the constructional use of the article with the participle,
there is still less, if indeed anything at all. To consider
τὸ γεννώμενον is rather a concession to carefulness than the
acknowledgement of a real difficulty.
</p>

<p>
2. Γινώσκω must be examined, because in i. 34 it is used of
knowledge in the way of marital relationship. The only parallel
in the New Testament is Mt. i. 25, where, however, it is used of
a man: καὶ οὐκ ἐγίνωσκεν αὐτὴν ἕως οὖ ἕτεκεν υἱόν. On the other
hand, in other senses, γινώσκω occurs fairly frequently in Lk.
It is, however, in no sense Lukan, being distributed evenly
throughout the New Testament, except in the Johannine writings,
where it is very common.
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
We cannot, therefore, produce evidence to show that elsewhere
St. Luke uses γ. in the special sense of i. 34. Nevertheless, there
is no reason why he should not have written γ. in that passage,
and there are considerations which go to show how he could
easily have used the word.
</p>

<p>
In i. 34 and also in Mt. i. 25 γινώσκω is by no means
a <q>Hebraistic euphemism</q>,<note place='foot'>Cf. Moulton and Milligan, p. 127 a.</note> yet it is probable that the influence
of the Septuagint is to be found in both passages. In the LXX
there are several instances of γ. used, as in i. 34, of a woman. It
is so used in Gen. xix. 8 (of Lot's daughters), in Judg. xi. 39 (of
Jephthah's daughter), and in Num. xxxi. 17 (of the women of
Midian). If, then, we are right in tracing the influence of the
LXX, in i. 34, we have ground for finding the hand of St. Luke
in that passage, even though he never again uses γ. in that sense.
For it is just in Lk. i, ii that the influence of the LXX is most
marked.<note place='foot'>Cf. Harnack's <hi rend='italic'>Luke the Physician</hi>, p. 104; Moulton, <hi rend='italic'>Proleg.</hi>, p. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Even if we do not press LXX influence (for γ. in this special
sense is found <q>in Greek writers from the Alexandrian age
down</q>),<note place='foot'>So Thayer-Grimm, p. 117, where it is pointed out that the same idiom
appears in the Latin, in <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cognoscere</foreign>, Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Met.</hi> iv. 596.</note> it is not at all apparent why St. Luke himself should not
have used the word. And if the argument in favour of the theory
of interpolation is to be sustained, it is scarcely enough to urge
the bare fact that St. Luke does not use γ. as in i. 34 elsewhere.
An idiom which occurs in Greek writers from the time of
Menander<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Moulton and Milligan, op. cit., p. 127 a.</note> (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 325) may well have been known to a writer
like St. Luke, apart from its presence in the Septuagint. If
verses 34, 35 are indeed Lukan, it is quite probable that in γ. we
should find the influence of the Septuagint, but we are not at all
shut up to Septuagint usage. In the connexion in which it
occurs γινώσκω was a suitable word to employ, and its presence
there is in no way incongruous with Lukan authorship.
</p>

<p>
3. In these verses the word which is of greatest difficulty is
without doubt ἐπεί. In the rest of the New Testament it occurs
25 times. Of these 10 are found in the Pauline Epistles
and 9 in the Epistle to the Hebrews. The remaining 6 appear
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
in the Gospels; 3 in Mt., 1 in Mk., and 2 in Jn. Apart then
from i. 34 ἐπεί occurs nowhere in St. Luke's works.
</p>

<p>
There are, it is true, two Lukan passages, one in the Gospel
(vii. 1) and the other in the Acts (xiii. 46), where ἐπεί δέ occurs
in some MSS. The true reading, however, in both cases is
probably ἐπειδή.<note place='foot'>So L. T. WH. In both cases WH. give ἐπεί δέ in the margin.</note> We have, therefore, to face the fact, that not
only is ἐπεί found nowhere else in St. Luke's works, but that
elsewhere he seems to prefer ἐπειδή and ἐπειδήπερ (the latter in
the Prologue to the Gospel, and the former five times out of the
ten cases in which it occurs in the New Testament). Here is the
strongest argument, which on linguistic grounds can be urged
against the genuineness of i. 34 f. The richness of St. Luke's
vocabulary increases the difficulty.<note place='foot'>There are <q>261 words which occur in the New Testament only in the
gospel of St. Luke</q> (Harnack, <hi rend='italic'>Date of Acts</hi>, p. 2). Plummer (ICC., St. Lk.,
lii) speaks of 312 such words, but says that 52 are doubtful and 11 occur in
quotations. Including Acts, according to Plummer, the number is 750 or
(including doubtful cases) 851.</note> Why, if he has used ἐπεί in
i. 34, he should never employ it again, is a question which it is
not easy to answer. If, in view of the evidence as a whole, the
case for an interpolation fails, we shall have to content ourselves
with the fact, however strange, that here and here only έπεί
occurs in Lk. A writer indeed may use a word once and never
again. Ἐπεί occurs but once in Mk. (xv. 42), and it may be so
here. Assuredly, in a linguistic argument room must always be
left for the occurrence of ἅπαξ λεγόμενα in an individual writer.
The force of this contention is, however, somewhat weakened by
the preference which St. Luke seems to show for ἐπειδή, and it
must be allowed that the case for an interpolation does receive
support from ἐπεί.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>c.</head>

<p>
We have now to consider the <hi rend='italic'>third</hi> division of the linguistic
evidence. It includes the following words and phrases:
</p>

<lg>
<l>τὸ γεννώμενον (the construction),</l>
<l>κληθήσεται,</l>
<l>δύναμις Ὑψίστου,</l>
<l>διὸ καί,</l>
<l>ἐπισκιάσει σοι,</l>
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
<l>Πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ σέ,</l>
<l>εἶπεν δὲ ... πρὸς ...</l>
</lg>

<p>
1. We begin with τὸ γεννώμενον (the construction.) As is well
known, the article with the participle is quite a characteristic of
the Lukan writings. <q>Participles with the article often take the
place of substantives</q>, writes Plummer (ICC., St. Lk., p. lxii).
The instances given by Plummer are as follows:
</p>

<p>
ii. 27. κατὰ τὸ εἰθισμένον. (Here only in NT.)
</p>

<p>
iv. 16. κατὰ τό εἰωθός. (Here and Acts xvii, 2 only.)
</p>

<p>
viii. 34. ἰδόντες δὲ οἱ βόσκοντες τὸ γεγονὸς ἕφυγον. (Here and
Mk. v. 14; Lk. [xxiv. 12]. Cf. also Acts iv. 21.)
</p>

<p>
xxii. 22. κατὰ τὸ ὡρισμένον. (Here only in NT. Cf. the parallel
passages, Mt. xxvi. 24 and Mk. xiv. 21, where we find καθὼς
γέγραπται περὶ αὐτοῦ.)
</p>

<p>
xxiv. 14. περὶ πάντων τῶν συμβεβηκὸτων τούτων. (Cf. Acts
iii. 10.)
</p>

<p>
To these may be added xxi. 36, xxiii. 47, 48. The construction
is clearly Lukan, without, of course, being exclusively
Lukan, and though τὸ γεννώμενον does not occur elsewhere in
St. Luke's works, the verb is not uncommon (10 times out of
93 in the NT., of which 40 occur in the Genealogy in Mt.).
</p>

<p>
2. Κληθήσεται. In his <hi rend='italic'>Date of Acts</hi> Harnack underlines this
verb, as a Lukan trait, wherever it occurs in the <q>We</q> Sections,
which he prints on pp. 4-12. Out of the total number of cases
in which it occurs in the New Testament, no less than 44 per
cent. are found in the Lukan writings. In the Gospel it is
present 41 times. It should also be noted that when we
compare καὶ τὸ γ. ἅγιον κληθήσεται with the analogous phrase
in Mt. 1. 20, τὸ γὰρ ἐν αὐτῇ γεννηθὲν ἐκ πνεύματός ἐστιν ἁγίου,
in the latter the Lukan καλέω is absent. Of course καλέω is
a common word, but St. Luke's use of it is distinctive, and with
this usage κληθήσεται in verse 35 agrees.
</p>

<p>
3. We have referred to δύναμις already,<note place='foot'>P. 59.</note> and have said that
while frequent in Lk., it is too common a word to be important
for our present purpose. The case is otherwise with the phrase
δύναμις Ὑψίστου. St. Luke is fond of using δ. in composition
with other words in the genitive. In his Gospel, he employs
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
it with τὸ πνεῦμα, ὁ θεός, Κύριος, οἱ οὐρανοί, and ὁ ἐχθρός.
In the Acts (viii. 10) we have ἡ Δύναμις τ. θεοῦ ἡ καλουμένη
Μεγάλη. In Mt. we find this usage twice; in Mk. once; in the
main epistles of St. Paul it occurs 13 times; elsewhere in the
New Testament 7 times. That is to say, out of 29 instances
in the New Testament (other than i. 35),<note place='foot'>As in all these enumerations. See note on p. 58.</note> St. Luke has 6 (or
20 per cent.). We may therefore say that this again is a marked
characteristic of St. Luke's usage, and though the phrase δ. Ὕ.
does not occur again in Lk. (it occurs nowhere else in the NT.),
it is thoroughly congruous with the Lukan style. We have also
to note the word Ὕψιστος. Out of 12 instances in the New
Testament St. Luke actually has 8, or 75 per cent. As, however,
three of these occur in chaps. i and ii, it might be argued that
the interpolator has introduced  Ὕ. in verse 35 under the influence
of these very chapters. That, however, he should combine it
with δ. is interesting. Indeed, on the theory of interpolation, our
interpolator has combined a distinctively Lukan word (Ὕψιστος)
with another word (δύναμις) which St. Luke often uses (24 times),
to produce a characteristic Lukan phrase (δ. in composition with
a noun in the genitive)!
</p>

<p>
4. Διὸ καί. Elsewhere St. Luke uses διό 9 times (once in the
Gospel and 8 times in the Acts). In this respect he may be
compared with St. Paul, who uses the word 25 times, and the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, who employs it 8 times.
In the Catholic Epistles it appears 6 times. There is but one
instance in Mt. and a doubtful case in Mk. The results are also
interesting when we take διὸ καί. Out of 10 instances in the
New Testament, St. Luke has 2 (Ac. x. 29 and xxiv. 26),
St. Paul has 6, and Hebrews 2. There is not an instance in
Mt. or Mk., or anywhere else in the New Testament. We are
far from suggesting that no one else could use διὸ καί.<note place='foot'>Cf. Th-Gr., p. 152 a, and for papyri, &amp;c., Moulton and Milligan, op. cit.,
p. 163 b.</note> The
point is that the supposed interpolator has introduced the phrase
into the work of a writer who, with St. Paul and the author of
Hebrews, alone among New Testament writers employs it!
</p>

<p>
5. Ἐπισκιάσει σοι. Ἐπισκιάζω appears in four other places in
the New Testament. Of these, three are connected with the
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
story of the Transfiguration (Mt. xvii. 5, Mk. ix. 7, Lk. ix. 34).
That the remaining instance should be Acts v. 15 is, in connexion
with our present problem, an interesting fact. Thayer-Grimm
remarks that the verb occurs in <q>profane</q> authors, <q>generally
with an accusative of the object, and in the sense of obscuring</q>.
In the Septuagint, however, it is used of the divine covering or
overshadowing (cf. Ps. xc. (xci.) 4; Ps. cxxxix. (cxl.) 8; Ex. xl.
29 (35)). We have to ask whether these passages, especially the
last, have influenced the writer of i. 35. We cannot assume the
point, of course, but there is much to be said for it. The thought
of the cloud of Yahweh overshadowing the tent of meeting may
very well have shaped the thought and the phrasing of δ. Ὕψίστου
ἐπισκιάσει σοι. If there is any weight in this suggestion (cf.
Plummer, op. cit., p. 24), again it tells for Lukan authorship&mdash;so
far, that is to say, as the undoubted fact that chaps. i and ii
have a distinctly Old Testament atmosphere will take us. Apart,
however, from such considerations it is a remarkable fact, on the
theory of interpolation, that a word so rare in the New Testament,
and one which St. Luke uses more than any one else,
should appear in the suspected verses. Acts v. 15 (ἵνα ἐρχομένου
Πέτρου κἂν ἡ σκιὰ ἐπισκιάσει τινὶ αὐτῶν) is enough in itself to
raise the gravest doubt that we have here to do with an
interpolator.
</p>

<p>
6. Πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ σέ. Here we have first to call
attention to the verb ἐπέρχομαι. Apart from Eph. ii. 7 and
James v. 1, this verb is limited to the Lukan writings, where
it occurs six times (i.e. besides i. 35). We have already spoken
of Πνεῦμα ἅγιον and remarked that, while it is characteristic
of St. Luke, we could not lay stress upon that fact, since even an
interpolator would naturally introduce a reference to the Holy
Spirit in such a connexion as i. 35. If, however, as now we
take the whole phrase, we come to a very different conclusion.
For in Acts i. 8 we have the significantly close parallel, ἐπελθόντος
τ. ἁγίου πνεύματος ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς. The parallel speaks for
itself!
</p>

<p>
7. We consider lastly, εἶπεν δὲ ... πρός. A comparison of
passages in the four Gospels and the Acts gives the following
results:
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<lg>
<l>εἶπεν δέ: Jn. 1 (&amp; 2?); Lk. (G.) 60; Acts 15; Lk. (G. &amp; Ac.) 75</l>
<l>εἶπεν ... πρός: Mt. 1?; Mk. 2; Jn. 9; Lk. (G.) 79; Acts 26; Lk. (G. &amp; Ac.) 105</l>
<l>εἶπεν δὲ ... πρός: Lk. (G.) 25; Acts 2; Lk. (G. &amp; Ac.) 27</l>
</lg>

<p>
To the facts noted in the foregoing table we may add that
εἶπεν πρός occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. St. Luke,
therefore, has it 105 times out of 116. Still more is εἶπεν δὲ ...
πρός limited to St. Luke. No other New Testament writer uses
the phrase, and St. Luke has it 27 times.<note place='foot'>Sir John C. Hawkins's record of πρός (used of speaking to) is as follows
(HS., 2nd Ed., p. 21): Mt. 0, Mk. 5, Lk. 99, Ac. 52, Paul 2, Jn. 19, rest of NT. 4.
Thus for the Lukan writings the percentage is 83.4.</note>
</p>

<p>
In his three books on the Acts, Harnack is fond of underlining
Lukan characteristics in the <q>We</q> Sections, in order to show
the linguistic identity which exists between these Sections and
the rest of the work. Let us see how Lk. i. 34 f. appears, when
treated in this way; not forgetting, of course, that we are dealing
with two verses only. It is obviously impossible to indicate by
this method the special significance of each word or phrase;
this, however, has already been shown. Our results may be
represented as follows: <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>εἶπεν δὲ</hi> Μαριὰμ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πρὸς τὸν</hi> ἄγγελον Πῶς
ἔσται τοῦτο, ἐπεὶ ἄνδρα οὐ γινώσκω; καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ἄγγελος εἷπεν
αὐτῇ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>Πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ σέ</hi>, καὶ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>δύναμις  Ὕψίστου
ἐπισκιάσει σοι· διὸ καὶ τὸ γεννώμενον</hi> ἅγιον <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κληθήσεται</hi>, υἱὸς
θεοῦ.
</p>

<p>
A possible reply to the linguistic argument presented above
is that we may have to do with an interpolator who has
thoroughly entered into the Lukan style. If our examination
has shown anything at all, it has shown that Lk. i. 34. f. is very
far from presenting neutral features: it is shot through and
through with <q>Lukanisms</q>.<note place='foot'>Moffatt's remark (<q>The style of 34-5 is fairly Lucan, though διό occurs
only once in the third gospel and ἐπεί never</q>, INT., 269) is surely an understatement.
As we have seen διό occurs eight times in Acts.</note> But, it may be asked, could not
an interpolator, strongly influenced by the Lukan style, have
penned these verses?
</p>

<p>
Let us see what, on that hypothesis, the interpolator has done.
He has produced a passage of thirty-seven words, in which there
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
is not a construction, and only one word (ἐπεί), which is not well
represented in the Lukan writings. He has used a word (γινώσκω)
in a sense not elsewhere illustrated in those works, but a word
which St. Luke would naturally employ in the connexion in
which it occurs. He has employed words, phrases, and constructions
for which St. Luke has a fondness, such as καλέω,
δύναμις Ὕψίστου, διὸ καί, the article with the participle in place
of a noun (τὸ γενν.).<note place='foot'>See, however, p. 57 n.</note> He has used two verbs (ἐπισκιάζω and
ἐπέρχομαι) which are rare in the New Testament, but which
St. Luke uses more than once; the phrase Π. ἅ. ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ
σέ, which is closely paralleled in Acts i. 8; and, above all, the
markedly Lukan εἶπεν δὲ ... πρός.
</p>

<p>
This feat, it must be confessed, is a striking performance. If,
indeed, it has been achieved, we must conclude that it has been
carried out deliberately. We make every allowance for the
possibility that a redactor may well enter into the style of an
author. But to suppose that in so short a passage so many
Lukan features have come together without premeditation or
design is all but impossible. We make bold to say that, if we
must admit such an undesigned collocation of <q>Lukanisms</q>,
we can have little confidence in the linguistic argument anywhere.
</p>

<p>
But can we believe that the linguistic features of Lk. i. 34 f.
have been <emph>purposely</emph> introduced? Such a question is its own
answer. No one, assuredly, would resort to the desperate
expedient of supposing a redactor, who laboriously amasses
Lukan characteristics, with the intention of passing off the very
phraseology of his insertion as genuine. A modern interpolator
might work along these lines, but not an ancient redactor. Interpolations
are not forgeries. The thought of consciously reproducing
stylistic features in an insertion would probably never
have occurred to a redactor of the Gospels.<note place='foot'>A good illustration of this point is found in the spurious ending to
St. Mark's Gospel. As Prof. E. P. Gould shows (ICC., St. Mk., pp. 301-4)
out of 163 words 19 (or more than 11 per cent.) are not found elsewhere in the
Gospel. They include such words as ἐκεῖνος (5 times), πορεύομαι (3 times),
θεάομαι (twice). There are also two unfamiliar expressions: τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ
γενομένοις (verse 10) and μετα (δὲ) ταῦτα.</note>
</p>

<p>
So far then as linguistic considerations go, we must conclude
that our unknown interpolator is a mythical personage. We do
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
not forget the difficulty of ἐπεί, but if Lk. i. 34 f. is a non-Lukan
interpolation, we must have more support than this. Warp and
woof are Lukan; only a single thread gives cause for hesitation.
Must not this hesitation give way when we look at the facts as
a whole? Can we strain out the gnat, and swallow the camel?
Assuredly on linguistic grounds the most reasonable conclusion
we can frame is that <hi rend='italic'>Lk. i. 34 f. comes from the hand of St. Luke
himself</hi>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Summary and Conclusion</head>

<p>
We have now to co-ordinate our results. However strong
a linguistic argument may be, there is perhaps always room for
the view that it is confirmatory rather than demonstrative. In
the present case also, the shortness of the passage can be pleaded.
In noticing this objection we urged that the character of the
passage is the relevant consideration, and we think Lk. i. 34 f.
meets this demand. But we have no need to press the linguistic
argument to the extent we ourselves believe to be legitimate,
when we find that both this argument and the textual argument
point steadily in the same direction. It is this fact, that both
arguments converge on the same point, which is the ultimate
ground for our conclusion. Short of supplying a rigid demonstration,
which should not be sought, it is sufficient to establish
for us the Lukan authorship of Lk. i. 34 f.
</p>

<p>
This view carries with it at once the further conclusion that at
some time or other St. Luke taught and believed in the Virgin
Birth. But before we can rest satisfied with this result, we need
to look more closely at <hi rend='italic'>an alternative form of the interpolation-hypothesis</hi>,
to which reference has already been made (p. 36).
This is the view of Kattenbusch, Merx, Weinel, and J. M. Thompson
(<hi rend='italic'>Miracles in the New Testament</hi>, p. 149).
</p>

<p>
According to this theory the interpolation consists in the
phrase ἐπεὶ ἄνδρα οὐ γινώσκω, an insertion which, it is contended,
has transformed the promise of a natural conception into the
prophecy of a virgin birth. Mr. Thompson notices the two forms
which the theory may assume. The insertion may be either
<q>a modification of St. Luke's source, introduced by the Evangelist
himself, as editor</q>, or it may be <q>a later addition to the text of
Lk. by some person or congregation who wished to make the
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
miracle quite clear</q> (p. 149). It is obvious that, in its former
shape, this hypothesis would not seriously affect our results
reached thus far, provided we could agree that <q>verse 35 is not
inconsistent with human parentage</q> (Thompson, p. 148), and is
best interpreted in this way. As regards the second form of the
theory, the case is different. If ἐπεὶ ἄνδρα οὐ γινώσκω is the
addition of a later reader or congregation, it is much more difficult
to think that St. Luke taught the Virgin Birth. It would
not be impossible; but it would leave the whole problem to rest
upon the interpretation of verse 35.
</p>

<p>
We are unable to accept the theory that ἐπεὶ ἄνδρα οὐ γινώσκω
is an insertion of unknown origin, for the following reasons:
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>On the whole, the more natural interpretation of verse 35 is
that in itself it implies the Virgin Birth.</hi> It is easier, on this
view, to explain ἐπελεύσεται and ἐπισκιάσει followed by διὸ καί.
(Cf. Schmiedel, col. 2957 n.; Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>St. Lk.</hi>, p. 24f.; Lobstein,
op. cit., p. 67.)
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>No textual evidence can be cited in support of the theory.</hi>
This is frankly admitted by Mr. Thompson, and the insertion is
explained as an editorial modification. We could regard this
explanation as sufficient, if the <q>insertion</q> could be looked upon
as an <q>explanatory phrase</q>, intended to sharpen a reference to
the Virgin Birth, which had already been found in the context.
On this reading of the problem, absence of textual variation
might not be an insuperable difficulty. But if we must regard
ἐπεὶ ἄνδρα οὐ γινώσκω as a doctrinal modification&mdash;an attempt
on the part of an unknown editor to impose upon the narrative
a sense quite different from that which previously it had been
understood to bear&mdash;then the argument sketched in the first
part of the present chapter is wholly against the theory. We
cannot understand why no echoes of the earlier view have
lingered.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>It is difficult to suppose that a later reader who sought to
work up the original narrative in the interests of the Virgin Birth
would have exercised such restraint.</hi> To expand a narrative in
the direction of the sense which it already bears is a conceivable
suggestion. To transform it totally by merely adding four words
is a theory which does not carry conviction. Was ever an interpolator
so ingenious as this?
</p>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<p>
On the other side may be pleaded (1) the difficulty of ἐπεὶ,
(2) many of the arguments we have sketched in Chapter II. The
difficulty of ἐπεὶ we have to admit. As regards the second point,
we believe that the theory we have yet to outline in the next
chapter meets the case much better, without suffering from the
special objections which can be brought against the view we have
just discussed. For the reasons given we are unable to accept
that view. We prefer to regard Lk. i. 34 f. as a unity, and to
interpret both verses as implying the Virgin Birth. And as we
have found sufficient reasons, both on textual and linguistic
grounds, for ascribing the passage to St. Luke, we believe that
he taught the Virgin Birth.
</p>

</div>

</div>
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Place Of The Virgin Birth In The
Third Gospel</head>

<p>
In the present chapter we must formulate a theory which shall
do justice to the results obtained in the last two chapters. We
have argued that the Virgin Birth is not an original element in
the Third Gospel, that several passages in it are inconsistent
with the doctrine, and that Lk. i. 34 f. is a later insertion. On
the other hand we have given reasons for our belief that St. Luke
really did write the passage just mentioned, and that in consequence
he taught the Virgin Birth. It is useless, we think, to set
these results against one another; they are not contradictory.
The argument from the linguistic and textual facts will not make
one iota of difference to those derived from the treatment and
subject-matter of Lk. i, ii, and the latter will not in any way
impair the former. Writers who hold fast to the view that
St. Luke wrote i. 34 f. have not, in that one contention, answered
their opponents, and critics who plead for the hypothesis of non-Lukan
interpolation travel much too fast. The final theory must
take all the facts into account.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. A Suggested Theory</head>

<p>
So far as we ourselves are concerned, there is only one hypothesis
open to us, and it is not far to seek. It will be best if we
first state it somewhat baldly, leaving obvious difficulties to be
considered later. The theory is as follows:
</p>

<p>
In the first instance St. Luke wrote his Gospel, either in whole
or in part, without any knowledge of the Virgin Birth. To him,
as to the compiler of the Lukan Genealogy, Jesus was the son of
Joseph and of Mary. St. Luke's estimate of Jesus was not less
high than that of St. Paul and St. Mark, but, as was probably
true in the case of each of these writers, no tradition of the
Miraculous Birth had reached him. He looked upon Jesus as
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
the Child of Wondrous Promise, and for his analogies he turned
to the Old Testament to the stories of Isaac and of Samuel.
</p>

<p>
In contrast to earlier writers St. Luke had an excellent Birth-tradition
at his disposal. According to his sources the coming
and future Messianic greatness of Jesus had been divinely foretold.
His birth was heralded by angelic choirs, and humble shepherds
brought their meed of worship and of praise. By an insight
divinely given, men like Simeon and women like Anna saw in
Him the child of promise. He was to be a light for revelation
to the Gentiles and the glory of His people Israel. We need not
stay to look more closely into the story, which doubtless has
been worked up as regards its form by the Evangelist's hand.
Suffice it to say that St. Luke's picture is that of a Wondrous
Birth, supernaturally foretold; not a virgin birth.<note place='foot'>If we could accept the view that <q>seeing I know not a man</q> in verse 34
is St. Luke's only insertion, and that he wrote verse 35 from the first without
thought of the Virgin Birth, his point of view would then be somewhat
different. On this theory his thought would be that while born of Joseph and
Mary the promised child was none the less supernaturally conceived. See
p. 69 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some time after he had penned his narrative, possibly after it
had been dispatched to Theophilus, but at any rate before the
Gospel gained a wider circulation, St. Luke received the tradition
of the Virgin Birth. At what time and from what source the
story reached him we are quite unable to say; possibly it was
from some reader or readers to whom he had submitted his
narrative; possibly the story travelled along some independent
channel. In any case the probability is that the tradition was
imparted to St. Luke by some one who claimed to possess a fuller
and a better account, and whose claim the Evangelist respected
and admitted. Having regard to St. Luke's standing and methods
as an historian, we prefer to believe that the tradition reached
him through a definite and <emph>personal</emph> channel, than to suppose that
of his own initiative he freely altered a valuable source out of
deference to a growing theory.
</p>

<p>
The historical value of the new information is a question we
are not now considering. It is part of our theory, however, that it
satisfied the mind of St. Luke; to him the Virgin Birth was
historic fact. Probably the story appealed to him at once as
a fitting explanation of the unique personality of Jesus. It was
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
a tradition rich in doctrinal possibilities; it provoked reflection,
and it answered questions.
</p>

<p>
The Evangelist saw at once that the story must find a place in
his narrative. Fortunately it was not too late, and fortunately
again there was a point where it could be included without
entailing the necessity of rewriting cc. i, ii entirely. He had
only to insert the words we have now in i. 34 f. into the address
of the angel, and to add to the opening words of the Genealogy
the phrase <q>as was supposed</q>, to obtain a narrative in which
truths previously unknown to him found sufficient statement.
If we can suppose that the adaptation of what he had previously
written was not drastic enough, we obtain a hypothesis which at
least does justice to every result we have yet secured.
</p>

<p>
The view that Lk. i. 34 f. is an interpolation made by St. Luke
himself was put forward by Zimmermann in <hi rend='italic'>Studien und Kritiken</hi>
(p. 273 f.) in 1903. His treatment (cf. Moffatt, INT., p. 269 n.)
differs in several respects from that outlined above. Zimmermann
posits an Aramaic Jewish-Christian source which described a
natural birth, and suggests that it was in the course of translating
this document that St. Luke added i. 34 f. The Evangelist is
also credited with having altered i. 27 and ii. 5, so as to describe
Mary as betrothed to Joseph. Zimmermann also explains ii. 22
(αὐτῶν) as a mistranslation, and ascribes to St. Luke the parenthesis
of ii. 35 a, and the chronology of iii. 1-2, which he holds is
inaccurate.
</p>

<p>
According to this hypothesis St. Luke must have been
acquainted with the Virgin Birth <emph>before</emph> he began to translate
the supposed Aramaic document. This view is encumbered with
difficulty; for, if Zimmermann is right, we should certainly
expect a much more drastic editing of the document than can
be shown. The extent to which this difficulty appears in the
case of our own theory is one for which we think that justification
can be given.<note place='foot'>See later pp. 78-84.</note> In the case of Zimmermann's hypothesis the
obstacle is too great. On this view we cannot understand how
the Evangelist allowed himself to write down those expressions
which are incompatible with the Miraculous Conception.<note place='foot'>Cf. V. H. Stanton (GHD., ii, p. 226 f.).</note>
</p>

<p>
The view we have preferred agrees with that of Zimmermann
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
in positing a source or sources which described a natural birth.
It differs from it in denying that the Evangelist knew of the
Virgin Birth at the time when he made use of those sources.
We prefer to think that it was after cc. i, ii had attained what is
substantially its present form in Greek, that St. Luke came to
hear of the Virgin Birth, and that it was then that he inserted
i. 34 f. This supposition includes the positive advantages of
Zimmermann's theory, and it agrees better with the existing
literary phenomena of Lk. i, ii.<note place='foot'>As regards the remaining details of Zimmermann's hypothesis, none of
them is really necessary to our theory. We believe that what St. Luke
actually wrote in ii. 5 was <q>with Mary his wife</q> (see pp. 32 ff.). But his new
information did not compel him to alter this to <q>with Mary who was betrothed
to him</q>, though later readers thought the change was necessary. Nor was it
required to alter i. 27. Even in the original narrative (i.e. on our theory,
before i. 34 f. was added) the passage may have read as we have it now, the
prophecy being regarded as uttered previous to marriage. There is no real
need to regard <q>to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph</q> as
an interpolation in the interests of the Virgin Birth, either (with Harnack)
on the part of a redactor, or (with Zimmermann) on the part of St. Luke
himself.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Literary Conditions Under Which the Gospels Were Written</head>

<p>
In holding the view we have outlined, we have no thought of
running with the hare and hunting with the hounds. Our theory
is not intended as an eirenicon. It is not an attempt to make
the best of two worlds, the critical and the dogmatic. If we
appear to have introduced the Virgin Birth into the Third
Gospel by the back door, after we have bowed it out at the
front, this is simply because the evidence leaves us no alternative.
Our theory makes room for the twofold fact, as it seems to us,
(1) that the Virgin Birth is not an original element in the Third
Gospel, and (2) that St. Luke wrote the one passage in the
Gospel which asserts the doctrine; thus for us it is inevitable.
</p>

<p>
If, from another point of view, our hypothesis seems a bold
venture, we may justly claim that the facts are such as to demand
a bold treatment. Nor is it a sufficient objection to say that the
theory is complex. Life is a complex thing, and there are few
times when we need to remember it so much as when we are
thinking of the production of an historical work.
</p>

<p>
Apart from other claims which can be made, our theory has
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
one important, if general, advantage; it takes account of the
elementary facts of human composition. Have we given sufficient
thought to the fact that a writer like St. Luke may well have
turned back to review, and even to alter, in the light of further
information, what he had already written? Is not this what
nearly every one does who writes or relates anything at all? Is
it not indeed rather a rare than a usual proceeding to write
a story from start to finish without insertion, omission, and
revision?
</p>

<p>
In his <q>Introduction</q> Dr. James Moffatt has drawn attention
to these things, and especially as they concern St. Luke's two
works. He shows that interpolation may take place <q>either
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) at the hands of the author himself, or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) by subsequent
editors of the volume, after the writer's death, or (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) by scribes
(or editors) of the text</q> (p. 36). Under (a) he refers to instances
in Aeschylus, Herodotus, Virgil, Juvenal, Martial, and Lucretius.
<q>Several passages in the <hi rend='italic'>De Rerum Natura</hi> (e.g. ii. 165-83) are
also to be explained most naturally as additions made by Lucretius
himself to the original draft, and in the case of the Third Gospel
or its sequel it is not unlikely that Luke may have re-edited ...
his work</q> (p. 37). Dr. Moffatt gives a very interesting modern
example in the case of <hi rend='italic'>Northanger Abbey</hi>, which was first composed
by Jane Austen in 1798. <q>In the fifth chapter, however,
we have an allusion to Miss Edgeworth's <hi rend='italic'>Belinda</hi>&mdash;a novel which
did not appear until 1801. This proves that Miss Austen's work
lies before us in a revised form; the first draft was gone over
by the authoress before its final publication some years later</q>
(p. 37).<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Ox. Studies in the Syn. Prob.</hi>, pp. 417, 420, where the Rev. N. P.
Williams, M.A., suggests that certain passages in Mk. may be later insertions,
made <q>possibly by St. Mark himself</q>.</note>
</p>

<p>
It will scarcely be denied that the possibility of interpolation
by an original author has often been overlooked by many critics.
They are not slow to find the insertions of later readers and
scribes, but often it seems tacitly to be assumed that the original
writers must have written with logical and almost unerring precision.
Curiously enough, something like the Verbal Inspiration
of Scripture is required to justify some of the critical results
reached. This is a doctrine long since discredited, but being
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
dead it yet speaks. It will have to be allowed, we think, that
mechanical theories of Inspiration have not yet left us free to
perceive those ordinary conditions of writing under which the
New Testament writers wrote. The aftermath of Verbal Inspiration
still blinds us to the commonplaces of composition.
</p>

<p>
Of all New Testament authors St. Luke is perhaps the last to
have issued his works without modifications. The high art which
is self-evident in a modern writer like Robert Louis Stevenson
was not attained without corrections, substitutions, redrafting,
and rewriting. Without drawing the parallel too closely, and
without impugning his real inspiration, we may well credit some
of these processes to St. Luke. This, however, is an argument
we cannot press too far, for, as will be seen in the following
section, there is good ground for the belief that St. Luke's
revision of his work was never complete. It is sufficient for our
hypothesis to find room for a measure of revision and for the
presence of modifications required by new information.
</p>

<p>
The nature of St. Luke's task is an added reason for expecting
these processes. In his Preface (i. 1-4) St. Luke shows a desire
to produce a full and accurate record, and claims to have traced
the course of all things from the first. Any new information
bearing upon the Birth and the hidden years of the Infancy
would be especially welcome to him. Any one, moreover, who
has had anything to do with collecting memoirs knows that not
infrequently new facts come to hand just when the task seems
well-nigh completed, facts for which a place must be found,
however great the difficulties may be.
</p>

<p>
We are not indeed left entirely to conjecture. We can examine
St. Luke's treatment of the Markan record. The modifications
which he introduces are manifest, and they arise in different
ways. Many of them are stylistic, others are intended to clear
up difficulties, while it is in every way probable that others again
are corrections introduced as the result of new information. If,
from such causes, St. Luke does not hesitate to modify the
statements of St. Mark's Gospel, it is inconceivable that he
would have refrained from altering his own narrative if occasion
should arise.
</p>

<p>
We have at least one definite example, within St. Luke's
works, of a story which has been modified in the light of further
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
information. In Lk. xxiv there is good ground for thinking that
the final parting of Jesus from His disciples is not described as
an Ascension, and apparently it takes place at the close of
Easter Day. In Acts i we have the story of a forty days'
interval, during which the Risen Christ teaches His disciples the
things concerning the Kingdom of God (i. 3). The Ascension is
described as an act of visible levitation. Jesus is taken up into
heaven and a cloud receives Him out of His disciples' sight (i. 9).
As they stand gazing upwards two men appear by their side
clothed in white garments, who declare that Jesus shall return in
like manner as they beheld Him going into heaven (i. 10 f.). The
disciples then return to Jerusalem. It can hardly be denied that
this is a totally different story from that which is told in Lk. xxiv.
Whatever its historical value may be the presumption is that it
rests upon a tradition which had come to St. Luke's knowledge
after he had completed his Gospel. Apparently he acquired his
new information when it was too late to alter his earlier work.
Otherwise we may believe that the story would have appeared
in the Gospel and not in the Acts.
</p>

<p>
It may freely be granted that the foregoing considerations are
of a purely general character. Admittedly they do not prove
that Lk. i. 34 f. is a specific instance of modification. Our justification
of this hypothesis is the results we have reached in
Chapters II and III. What we have just urged, however, is
sufficient to show that our theory is not by any means inherently
impossible, but is consonant with St. Luke's procedure and
methods as a writer.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Objections to Which the Above Theory is Exposed</head>

<p>
We have now to consider what is perhaps the strongest objection
to which our theory is exposed. It may be stated as
follows:
</p>

<p>
If the Virgin Birth is a later element in the Third Gospel
introduced by St. Luke himself, the Evangelist's revision of
cc. i, ii might reasonably have been expected to be much more
thorough than it is. Why, for example, does he leave untouched
the references to Joseph and Mary as <q>the parents</q> of Jesus?
Why does he not qualify his ambiguous reference to <q>their</q>
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
purification? Why is he still untroubled by their astonishment,
and by their failure to understand the words of Jesus at Jerusalem?
Why does he not insert some clearer reference to the Davidic
descent of Mary, or at least give us reason to believe that he
looked upon Jesus as the adopted, and therefore legal, son of
Joseph? Why does he leave the Sonship mentioned in the first
part of the angel's speech (i. 31-3) apparently of a purely
Messianic character? Why does he not provide occasion in the
Annunciation for the terms of Mary's question in i. 34? In
short, are we not back again face to face with the same difficulties
with which our investigation opened? These are some of
the difficulties which our theory raises.
</p>

<p>
In reply to this objection there are two preliminary considerations
to be borne in mind. They are not arguments in the sense
of things which can be proved; they are rather possibilities
which ought seriously to be taken into account.
</p>

<p>
(1) In the first place it should be recognized that <hi rend='italic'>we may not
have all the details of St. Luke's actual reconstruction before us</hi>.
Something may have been altered or excised; we have the result;
we may not have all the stages. Usener (EB., col. 3350) has asserted
that statements of fact have actually been omitted from the original
narrative; he is even able to tell us what they are! He thinks
that we can <q>infer with certainty</q> that in the original form of the
narrative after i. 38 stood the further statement that Mary was
then taken to wife by Joseph and that she conceived by him.
Usener suggests that this statement was <q>judged inadmissible</q>
by the redactor who interpolated i. 34 f., and that in consequence
it was expunged. There can be little doubt that reasoning such
as this requires omniscience as well as intuition! And the same
criticism would be just in reply to any one who should elect to
tell us exactly what St. Luke himself has altered or omitted.
These are things which we do not know, and which we cannot
know; we cannot even <q>infer with certainty</q> that St. Luke has
omitted anything at all. But the broad possibility that he may
have effected transformations and modifications in cc. i, ii, which
we cannot now trace, is quite another matter, and, indeed, is by
no means improbable. And if this is so, must it not affect the
judgement we pass upon the skill or lack of skill which, on the
theory proposed, St. Luke has shown? We may not know all.
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
Obviously, we cannot prove this, but it is a consideration which
we ought to have in mind.
</p>

<p>
(2) A second thing to be remembered is that, if our theory is
true, <hi rend='italic'>we do not know anything of the actual circumstances under
which the new tradition was introduced into the Gospel; it may
have been in haste</hi>. Did the story reach the Evangelist at the
last moment? Or, if not, was there a process of sifting and
testing of the new information, which left little time when at
length the fateful decision was taken, and the Evangelist took
up his pen? Again we cannot prove these things, but again we
cannot deny them. And if we cannot deny them, we must not
ignore them. Only if we do ignore these possibilities, are we at
liberty to insist that the reconstruction should have been more
drastic. If, as we ourselves think, the supposition is reasonable,
that i. 34 f. was added when the Evangelist had only just heard
of the Virgin Birth tradition, we have clearly a good answer to
the objection we are considering.
</p>

<p>
The foregoing arguments are speculative; there are, however,
more positive considerations to urge. In addition to what has
been said, we may point out (3) the fact that <hi rend='italic'>St. Luke's writings
left his hand without a painstaking final revision</hi>, and (4) <hi rend='italic'>the
different effect upon the mind of a new piece of information as
compared with a belief, which has been held for some time, and
has already become an intellectual presupposition</hi>.
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>That St. Luke's writings left his hands without a final
revision is strongly supported by the literary phenomena of the
two works.</hi> The clearest evidence is found in the Acts, in which
we probably have a closer literary parallel to the Birth Stories
of Lk. i, ii than in the rest of the Gospel itself. Writing on the
Acts (<hi rend='italic'>Acts of the Apostles</hi>, Eng. Tr., pp. 203 ff.) Harnack gives
a list of more than two hundred <q>instances of inaccuracy and
discrepancy</q>. Harnack does not accept them all, and shows
that they are of different types, many of them being comparatively
trifling and unimportant. Some are cases of anacoluthon
and of transition from indirect to direct speech and
vice versa. There are also <q>cases where St. Luke introduces
persons with a certain unconcern, or in other places seems to
forget that he has already introduced them</q> (p. 230). Harnack
points out that <q>the details of a story are here and there inserted
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
later or again earlier than their proper place</q> (p. 227), and he
asserts that <q>instances of redundancy, of awkward repetition, of
silence upon important points, and of extraordinary brevity, can
be adduced from different parts of the book</q> (p. 230). He finds
<q>instances of discrepancy</q> in the three accounts of the conversion
of St. Paul, the letter of Claudius Lysias, the report of Festus,
the last speech of St. Paul at Rome, and in other passages
(p. 231).
</p>

<p>
Adequately to enter into this very interesting question would
take us too far beyond the limits of our main subject. It is
perhaps not unfair to suggest that Harnack's long list, as given
in pp. 203-25, is capable of very considerable reduction. There
is great force in Ramsay's remark: <q>He who reads Luke without
applying practical sense and mother-wit and experience will
always misunderstand him</q>, and in his caution: <q>When you
think you find an <q>inconsistency</q> in Luke, you should look
carefully whether you have been sufficiently applying these
qualities, before you condemn the supposed fault</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke the
Physician</hi>, p. 55). Ramsay himself admits, however, that there
are inconsistencies which cannot be denied, and holds that they
show that <q>the work never received the final form which Luke
intended to give it, but was still incomplete when he died</q>
(ib., p. 24). In his earlier work, <hi rend='italic'>St. Paul the Traveller and the
Roman Citizen</hi>, Ramsay has made the same suggestion, illustrations
of which he finds in Acts xvi. 19, 20 and xx. 4, 5.<note place='foot'>In Acts xvi. 19, 20 it is said that the owners of the demented girl <q>seized
Paul and Silas and dragged them into the agora before the magistrates</q>.
The words which immediately follow are: <q>and bringing them to the presence
of the praetors, they said....</q> Ramsay's comment is: <q>The expression halts
between the Greek form and the Latin ... as if the author had not quite made
up his mind which he should employ.... It is hardly possible that a writer,
whose expression is so concise, should have intended to leave in his text two
clauses which say exactly the same thing</q> (<hi rend='italic'>St. Paul</hi>, p. 217 f.). In reference
to Acts xx. 4, 5, Ramsay writes: <q>In verse 4 we have probably a case like
xvi. 19 f., in which the authority hesitated between two constructions, and
left an unfinished sentence containing elements of two forms</q> (ib., p. 289).
He adds that the sentence <q>perhaps never received the author's final
revision</q>.</note>
</p>

<p>
We may describe the impression which St. Luke, as a writer,
makes upon us by saying that, while his work is marked by
great literary art, and while it is characterized by many striking
instances of historical accuracy, yet, at the same time, the
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
Evangelist shows a certain unconcern in matters of detail (Harnack
would call it <q>a certain literary carelessness</q>), the results of which
would probably have disappeared had he subjected his works to
a close final revision. If this view is just there is little weight in
the objection that, on the theory we have stated, St. Luke's
reconstruction might have been expected to be more drastic than
it is. The inconsistencies he has left are like those which we find
elsewhere and are a feature of his works as they stand.
</p>

<p>
(4) Our final argument is of a psychological kind. It rests, as
we have said, upon <hi rend='italic'>the difference between an intellectual prepossession
and the first effect upon the mind of new information</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The previous argument might seem to point in another
direction. Will not the character of St. Luke's writings sufficiently
explain the literary phenomena of Lk. i, ii, on the view
that he taught the Virgin Birth from the first? In the light of
the discrepancies which occur in the Gospel and the Acts, can we
not believe that after all the Virgin Birth is an original element
in the Gospel? This contention would be an example of what
Harnack has called attempting to gather apologetic figs from
sceptical thistles.<note place='foot'>Cf. Loofs, <hi rend='italic'>What is the Truth about Jesus Christ?</hi>, p. 122.</note> We do not think that in this case the harvest
would realize expectations.
</p>

<p>
It must be remembered that the two cases are not parallel.
In the one case we begin with a writer whose mind is filled with
an intellectual presupposition, with a knowledge, that is to say,
of the Virgin Birth presupposed. Under these circumstances
the miracle must be <q>a necessary stone in the structure</q>, and its
effect determinative. If the Virgin Birth had been known to
St. Luke for some considerable time, we cannot think that
Lk. i, ii would have possessed the features to which we have
called attention in Chapter II. In the other case&mdash;that of our
hypothesis&mdash;the Virgin Birth is a piece of new information, and,
if this is so, we submit that inconsistencies left in the adapted
narrative wear a different hue. It is one thing to introduce into
a narrative what is inconsistent to one's presuppositions. It is
quite another thing not to perceive inconsistencies at once, when
our knowledge is enlarged by a totally new fact. A presupposition
is much more despotic than a subsequent discovery.
</p>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<p>
It is common knowledge that the implications of a new point
of view are not always immediately recognized. For a time old
and new live together. It is not by any means an easy task to
introduce into a narrative, constructed under the guidance of alien
presuppositions, a fact of an entirely new order. That St. Luke
should have performed his task so well argues no little skill in
literary craftsmanship. That his work was not completely done
is after all no more than we might expect. From the standpoint
of literary exactitude, no doubt the better plan would have been
to rewrite the narrative, or at least to subject it to a rigorous
pruning. But we ought not to complain if these things have not
been done. St. Luke was probably too much of an artist to feel
the merciless logic of his new information; and the result is
a compromise.
</p>

<p>
In connexion with our theory we do not think that this is an
unreasonable view to take. The difficulties are certainly much
greater upon the theory that St. Luke knew of the Virgin Birth
from the first. Granted certain presuppositions, and we can say
with good reason what a writer like St. Luke would not be likely
to do. Assume the entrance of a new fact, transforming by
a whole world of difference the writer's point of view, and who
can say just what he would do? We can say, of course, that he
would introduce his new knowledge, if persuaded of its truth;
but when we come to the details of reconstruction, we are face to
face with the uncertainties of the personal equation. The logical
procedure is drastic revision. If the writer stops short of this,
as he may very well do, and attempts to fuse his material, seams
must show and markings remain. This is precisely what we find
in Lk. i, ii. In i. 34 f. and its context we can detect the seams;
in c. ii we can see the markings.
</p>

<p>
It will be recognized that the situation is quite different on the
view which credits i. 34 f. to a later Christian editor. Against
this theory the objection we are considering has much greater
force. For it is unlikely that the redactor would approach the
Gospel with a knowledge of the Virgin Birth but lately gained.
On the contrary, it would probably be a doctrine with which he
had long been familiar. Accordingly, in addition to the other
objections that we have raised against the theory of late interpolation,
it would be legitimate to ask, Why has the redactor
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
not done his work better? Our own hypothesis&mdash;that St. Luke
had only just entered into a knowledge of the new tradition&mdash;is,
indeed, the one theory where we have the least need to ask this
question.
</p>

<p>
For the reasons given, we believe that the objection that
St. Luke's revision should have been more drastic is not insuperable.
That there is difficulty we allow. But there is probably
no solution of the Lukan problem, not even the correct one,
which will not leave difficulties of a kind. The problem is
complex and the facts often elusive. It is on the ground that
the theory we have sketched leaves least difficulties, and does
justice to the facts as they appear, that we venture to find in it
a reasonable solution of the problem of the Virgin Birth in
relation to the Third Gospel and to St. Luke.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Certain Consequences</head>

<p>
It remains for us to consider certain consequences which follow
if our hypothesis is true.
</p>

<p>
(1) In the first place, <hi rend='italic'>we can claim St. Luke as a witness to the
tradition of the Virgin Birth</hi>. This is a result of first importance.
For those who regard St. Luke as a very credulous person with
a special <q>fondness</q> for <q>a good miracle</q>, this conclusion will
mean little. But for those who are impressed by his claim to be
regarded as a good historical writer, it is not a view to be lightly
esteemed. There are those who will consider that St. Luke's
witness settles the historical question, and will be disposed on
the ground of his authority to accept the tradition. But with
greater reason there are others who will feel that, with all his
excellences as an historian, St. Luke has the elementary human
right to make a mistake, especially when he is dependent upon
the evidence of others. The determining feature is clearly the
character of his source or sources.
</p>

<p>
(2) A further fact to be noticed is that <hi rend='italic'>St. Luke's witness
marks a very early stage in the spread of the Virgin Birth tradition</hi>.
In this respect there is a contrast between the Third and
First Gospels. In the Third Gospel the tradition is stated, but
its problems are scarcely felt. There is a foreshadowing of this
in the words <q>as was supposed</q> in the Genealogy, but not more.
St. Luke has not really felt the problem of the Davidic descent.
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
He has not envisaged that very striking treatment of the problem
which we shall have occasion to point out in the Matthaean
Genealogy (see pp. 89 ff.). St. Luke's narrative is neither
didactic nor apologetic. It is almost, but not quite, a simple
narrative of what is implicitly accepted as fact. In making this
qualification we are thinking of the artistic form which the
earlier narrative embodied in Lk. i, ii has imposed upon St. Luke's
account of the Virgin Birth; but this is a matter which will come
up again a little later. The fact that is of outstanding interest
is that St. Luke could sit down to write a Gospel, with a desire
to trace out all things accurately from the first, and yet know
nothing of the Virgin Birth, until after the greater part, if not
the whole, of his work was completed.
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>It is the fact just noted which helps us to date the first
appearance of the Virgin Birth tradition; its date is bound up
with the question of the date of the Third Gospel.</hi> This is a
question which will receive further treatment in our final chapter
(pp. 117 ff.).
</p>

<p>
(4) <hi rend='italic'>Our hypothesis postulates an earlier narrative of the Birth
of Jesus which knew nothing of the Virgin Birth. The relation of
this narrative to the later tradition needs carefully to be considered.</hi>
</p>

<p>
We have already expressed the opinion that the earlier narrative
was probably taken from a good historical source. Ramsay
has noted signs of a womanly spirit in the whole narrative, and
thinks that it may well go back either to Mary, or to some one
who was very intimate with her (cf. <hi rend='italic'>Was Christ Born at Bethlehem?</hi>,
pp. 74-88; <hi rend='italic'>Luke the Physician</hi>, pp. 13, 50). Sanday is
not able to speak quite so confidently as to the nearness of the
source to Mary, but thinks that it could not be <q>more than two
or three degrees removed from her</q>. <q>It must have been near
enough</q>, he says, <q>to retain the fine touches which Professor
Ramsay so well brings out</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, p. 195 n.). These views
have won considerable support in Great Britain. It will be
remembered, of course, that they have regard to the whole of
Lk. i, ii, to the narrative, that is to say, as an account of the
Virgin Birth. The same arguments are valid, however, for
ascribing a good historical foundation to the narrative, even if
i. 34 f. is a later addition. The probability is that the source,
whether documentary or oral, is of Palestinian origin, and that it
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
points back ultimately, if not immediately, to the Holy Family.
On our theory, however, while silent as to the paternity of
Joseph, the source had nothing to say of the Virgin Birth.
It described the non-miraculous birth of the long-expected
Messiah.
</p>

<p>
At first sight the high historical value of this earlier source
would appear to be detrimental to the tradition of Lk. i. 34 f.
But it is not certain that this is so. There is more force than
has often been allowed in the suggestion that the facts of the
Virgin Birth may have been purposely withheld from public
knowledge for many years by those who knew them.<note place='foot'>Speaking of the late appearance of the Virgin Birth tradition G. H. Box
writes (op. cit., p. 137): <q>Its comparatively late appearance and primitive
character can only be reconciled by the explanation that it is based upon
facts which were for long treasured within a narrow circle in close contact
with our Lord, and which were only gradually divulged to the Church.</q>
Cf. also Sanday, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, pp. 193, 196.</note> Assuming
for the moment the truth of this view, we may ask, <hi rend='italic'>Would
nothing at all be told?</hi> If we think it probable that part at least
of the story would be related, it may be that the tradition upon
which St. Luke first drew is a version of that part. We might
even hazard the suggestion that it was the publication of this
story by St. Luke which drew out the fuller narrative. In other
words, the fact that the earlier tradition makes no reference to
the Virgin Birth need not be fatal to the truth of the later story
expanded in i. 34 f. This, of course, is speculation; but, at any
rate, the possibilities are such as to forbid the specious argument&mdash;the
Holy Family know nothing of the Virgin Birth! We
tread upon firmer ground when we urge that the higher the
historical value of the earlier story the less likely would St. Luke
have been disposed to modify it in deference to further information,
unless he had attached considerable value to the new
tradition, and was persuaded of its truth.
</p>

<p>
(5) As regards <hi rend='italic'>the origin of the Virgin Birth tradition implied
in Lk. i. 34 f.</hi>, we have to confess that we are completely in the
dark. We have stated our preference for the view that it came
through a personal channel (p. 73). We are unable to think
that in writing i. 34 f. St. Luke was himself merely translating
theology into narrative. But who the intermediary was we
cannot tell. On our theory, the tradition cannot have been
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
directly imparted to the Evangelist by Mary. Whether, in the
end, the story can be traced back to her, is a question we cannot
now discuss. At this stage it would be no more than a guess to
connect it with the women mentioned in Lk. viii. 2, 3; xxiv. 10,
or with the daughters of Philip (Acts xxi. 8, 9). In an historical
inquiry it is never safe to ascribe a tradition to an authority,
unless we have solid grounds for so doing. Otherwise, we import
a bias into the investigation, if indeed we do not beg the question.
The mistake is one which has been made more than once in
discussing the Virgin Birth. In the present case we have nothing
whatever to guide us, and accordingly we have to acquiesce in
the bare conclusion that St. Luke accepted the Virgin Birth
tradition, but that we do not know anything about his authority,
except that it satisfied his mind.
</p>

<p>
(6) The <hi rend='italic'>form</hi> in which the tradition reached St. Luke can
hardly have been the brief statement of i. 34 f. The literary
form of that passage is determined by that of the earlier narrative.
The latter, as we have said (p. 73), is something more than
a bare transcript of events. It is a product of high art, and is
shaped upon Old Testament models. Ramsay finds in it a Greek
element. The story has been <q>re-thought out of the Hebraic
into the Greek fashion</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke the Physician</hi>, p. 13). The divine
messenger becomes to St. Luke <q>the winged personal being who,
like Iris or Hermes, communicates the will and purpose of God</q>
(op. cit., p. 13). Having regard, however, to the Old Testament
birth-stories of Isaac, Samson, and Samuel, it is doubtful if we
really need this suggestion. In any case, we may say that it is
the mould in which the earlier story has been cast, which accounts
for the literary form of the Virgin Birth tradition in Lk. i. 34 f.
The tradition which St. Luke received probably contained the
substance of what is stated in verse 35, and asserted that Jesus
was begotten of Mary by the Holy Spirit.
</p>

<p>
(7) The historical value of the Virgin Birth tradition in the
Third Gospel is a question which cannot be answered until the
problem is treated as a whole. Our study of the Lukan problem
adds to the material at our disposal. It confirms our conclusions
in Chapter I as regards St. Paul and St. Mark. It also enables
us to say that <hi rend='italic'>St. Luke, in his later years, came to believe and
teach the Virgin Birth, on grounds which are unknown to us, but
which he himself deemed sufficient</hi>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Virgin Birth And The First Gospel</head>

<p>
More than the other Synoptic Gospels, the First Gospel
comes before us as an <q>official</q> document of the Christian
Church. Our Third Gospel was somewhat of the nature of
a <q>private venture</q>, and how inadequately the value of St. Mark's
Gospel was recognized in the first half of the second century
appears in the fact that its survival seems almost accidental, all
existing copies being derived from a single mutilated MS.<note place='foot'>Cf. Burkitt, <hi rend='italic'>The Gospel History and its Transmission</hi>, pp. 260, 274 f.</note>
Whether, then, we can claim the authority and sanction of the
First Gospel for the Virgin Birth tradition, is clearly a question
of first-rate importance. To some the question will appear
determinative; but for those also, who feel that in any case the
historical value of the witness would remain an open question,
a conclusion as regards the problem is of very great significance,
in view of its historical implications.
</p>

<p>
In the present chapter our purpose is to inquire how far the
First Gospel bears witness to the Virgin Birth, and what the
character of its witness is. Was the narrative, as we have it
to-day, present in the Gospel from the first? Is Mt. i, ii a later
insertion, or is the passage i. 18-25 an interpolation? Extremely
interesting discussions have also arisen around the question of
the Matthaean Genealogy and the true text of Mt. i. 16, and these
call for notice. The question of the historical value of the tradition
of Mt. i. 18-25 must in the main be postponed, but the
possibilities, and such positive facts as emerge, can be noted.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the best method of approach is to consider first the
character of the Genealogy, apart altogether from the question
of its authorship. The details of the textual problem of Mt. i. 16
will be discussed in an Appendix to the chapter. The remaining
points to be treated are the genuineness of cc. i, ii, the unity of
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
these chapters, and lastly the sources and implications of the
narrative, together with a survey of the results reached.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. The Characteristics of the Genealogy</head>

<p>
Among the features which mark the Genealogy we may note
the following:
</p>

<p>
(1) <hi rend='italic'>Its purpose</hi> is to show the Davidic descent of Jesus by
tracing the royal line (cf. verse 6 <q>David the king</q>).
</p>

<p>
(2) <hi rend='italic'>The structure is obviously artificial.</hi><note place='foot'>Cf. Burkitt (<hi rend='italic'>Evangelion Da-Mepharreshe</hi>, ii. 260); Moffatt (INT., 250);
Box (<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Jesus</hi>, p. 12); Sanday (<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, p. 201).</note> The Genealogy is
arranged in three groups of fourteen generations, an arrangement
to which the writer himself calls attention (verse 17). In order
to secure this structure, the names of Joash, Amaziah, and
Azariah are omitted (cf. 1 Chron. iii) and the third group
covers a space of about six hundred years. <q>If any source of
the schematism is wanted, the cabbalistic interpretation of דוד,
whose three letters are equivalent by gematria to the number 14,
is the most probable</q> (Moffatt, INT., p. 250 n.).
</p>

<p>
(3) The verb ἐγέννησεν is used throughout of legal, not physical,
descent.<note place='foot'>So among others Westcott, Burkitt, Box, Allen, Barnard, A. J. Maclean,
Moffatt.</note> This inference is drawn from the artificial character of
the Genealogy. Its omissions are obvious, and must have been
so both to the compiler and his readers. <q>The contemporaries
of the Evangelist knew their Bible at least as well as we do.
They knew that there were more than fourteen generations
between David and the Captivity, that Joram did not beget
Uzziah, and that Josiah did not beget Jeconiah</q> (Burkitt, <hi rend='italic'>Evan.
Da-Meph.</hi>, ii, p. 260). If the passage Mt. i. 18-25, as well as the
Genealogy, comes from the hand of the Evangelist, the verb
ἐγέννησεν must clearly indicate legal parentage; but there is
sufficient ground for this view within the Genealogy itself.
</p>

<p>
(4) The references to women in the Genealogy are unique, and
are best explained as due to an apologetic purpose. They cannot
be so well explained as reflecting a universalistic interest (Heffern,
quoted by Moffatt, INT., p. 251). In contrast to the Genealogy
in the Third Gospel, that in Mt. traces the descent no farther
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
back than to Abraham; it is fundamentally Jewish. There can
be little doubt but that the writer's purpose is to rebut Jewish
slanders already current regarding the birth of Jesus. <q>Throughout
the whole Genealogy the Evangelist appears to be telling us
in an audible aside that the heir had often been born out of the
direct line or irregularly. Thamar the daughter-in-law of Judah,
Rahab the harlot, Ruth the Moabitess, and the unnamed wife
of Uriah, are forced upon our attention, as if to prepare us for
still greater irregularity in the last stage</q> (Burkitt).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Evan. Da-Meph.</hi>, ii, p. 260. Cf. also Allen (ICC., St. Mt., p. 5); Box
(ib., p. 14); Moffatt (ib., p. 251).</note>
</p>

<p>
If these are the characteristic features of the Genealogy, it is
clear that <hi rend='italic'>from the first it was compiled with the Virgin Birth
presupposed</hi>. It is, in fact, an attempt to present that belief in
connexion with the claim that Jesus was of Davidic descent,
through the legal relationship in which He stood to Joseph.<note place='foot'><q>It is merely an embodiment, in genealogical form&mdash;a form specially
calculated to appeal to Jewish readers&mdash;of the idea that Jesus belonged,
through His relation to Joseph, to the royal family of David</q> (Box, ib.,
p. 15).</note>
Thus, the Matthaean Genealogy is unique; it differs altogether
from that in Lk. If to us its form seems forced and unreal, that
is because we fail to come to it from the historical point of view.
From this standpoint we may ask, with W. C. Allen (ICC.,
St. Mt., p. 6): <q>If the editor simply tried to give expression to
the two facts which had come down to him by tradition&mdash;the
fact of Christ's supernatural birth and the fact that He was the
Davidic Messiah, and did not attempt a logical synthesis of
them, who shall blame him?</q> We are not here concerned with
the question of the truth of the Virgin Birth tradition, but simply
with the view that the compiler of the Genealogy held that
belief, and for this inference a high degree of probability can be
claimed.
</p>

<p>
If this is the character of the Genealogy, it must follow that
<hi rend='italic'>the textual problem of Mt. i. 16</hi> differs considerably in importance
from the thought of a quarter of a century ago. It is becoming
increasingly recognized that, whatever the true text of Mt. i. 16
may be, it can make little difference to the character of the
Genealogy as outlined above. Its interest is textual and literary
rather than historical. The most interesting statement of this
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
point of view is that of F. C. Burkitt in his <hi rend='italic'>Evangelion Da-Mepharreshe</hi>
(1904, see vol. ii, pp. 258 ff.). On p. 258 Burkitt expresses
a firm belief that no fresh light upon the historical events
of the Nativity has been thrown either by the discovery of the
Sinaitic Syriac MS. or by the publication of the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogue of
Timothy and Aquila</hi>. He says (p. 261) that even if the Genealogy
had ended with the uncompromising statement <q>and Joseph begat
Jesus</q>, it would not prove that its compiler believed that Joseph
was the actual father of Jesus. In this connexion it is of great
interest to note that Archdeacon Allen, who upholds the historical
truth of the Virgin Birth, actually adopts in his commentary on
Mt. (ICC., 1907) the reading implied by the Sin. Syr., as the
true text of Mt. i. 16&mdash;<q>And Jacob begat Joseph. Joseph, to
whom was espoused Mary a virgin, begat Jesus, who is called
Christ</q> (p. 5). Writing in 1916, Canon Box takes a different
view of the textual problem, but is no less emphatic in his
assertion that, <q>even if the reading <hi rend='italic'>Joseph ... begat Jesus</hi> be
correct, it need not imply a belief in the natural generation of
Jesus</q> (<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Jesus</hi>, p. 15). Lastly, we may compare
the judgement of Dr. James Moffatt (INT., 1918): <q>Such
modifications as may be due to doctrinal presuppositions are
designed to re-set or to sharpen the reference of the original text
to the virgin birth, not to insert the dogma in a passage which
was originally free from it</q> (p. 251). These are great and
honoured names, but the opinion is not one which cries out for
the cloak of authority; it springs directly out of the character of
the Genealogy itself. If ἐγέννησεν is used throughout of legal
parentage, it would clearly be so in the last step, if it should be
proved that this also contained the word ἐγέννησεν. Indeed, we
should naturally expect to find that word in verse 16.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, it would not be right to regard the textual
problem as one of merely academic interest. It gives a valuable
sidelight upon the history of the exegesis of Mt. i, ii in the early
Christian centuries. It enables us to see how the Matthaean
narrative was viewed, the difficulties it raised, and the way in
which they were met. Thus it throws into strong relief the
unique character of the Genealogy. It also sheds a welcome
light upon the treatment which the text of the Gospels received
at the hands of their earliest readers before these writings had
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
acquired the status of sacred books. Even then if we have
finally to acquiesce in Dr. Moffatt's statement: <q>The textual
problem of i. 16 is not yet settled</q>, the question is one of absorbing
and of fruitful interest.<note place='foot'>See Appendix to present chapter.</note> For our immediate purpose it is
enough to say that the results, so far as they go, strengthen
rather than weaken our belief that the compiler of the Genealogy
worked under the presupposition of the Virgin Birth.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Genuineness of Mt. i, ii</head>

<p>
This problem can no longer be regarded as a burning question.
Few scholars of the present day would contend that the First
Gospel ever circulated without these chapters. In style, in
vocabulary, and in mode of treatment, they are of a piece with
the rest of the book.
</p>

<p>
(1) The <hi rend='italic'>literary style</hi> of the First Evangelist is not so marked
as that of St. Luke, but it has nevertheless a distinct character of
its own. As compared with that of St. Mark, it is <q>more prosaic
and colourless</q>, but it is <q>more calm and balanced</q> (Milligan).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The N. T. Documents, their Origin and early History</hi>, p. 148. W. C.
Allen (op. cit., p. lxxxv f.) seems to emphasize the more negative aspects of
the writer's style, but calls attention to phrases and constructions which are
said to be <q>strikingly characteristic of the Gospel</q>. Cf. Moulton, <hi rend='italic'>Gk. Gr.</hi>,
ii, p. 29.</note>
Prof. Burkitt describes it as follows: <q>I wish I could think of
some other word than <q>formality</q> by which to name the chief
characteristic of the First Evangelist's literary style. Formality
suggests rigidity, generally with a certain measure of incapacity,
and these are not among his defects. On the contrary, Matthew
has great literary skill, as well as dignity. Everything that he
says is put with admirable clearness and lucidity; what he writes
down he has first understood himself. If there is an exception
to be noted he notes it</q> (GHT., p. 186). Now this same style is
manifest everywhere throughout the Gospel, in cc. i, ii, as well as
elsewhere.<note place='foot'>Cf. Burkitt (GHT., p. 184 f.)</note> The theory therefore that these chapters are a later
insertion labours under an immense initial disadvantage. It
requires to be explained how it is that this characteristic literary
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
style is just as manifest in cc. i, ii as in the rest of the Gospel, in
spite of the fact that the subject-matter of these chapters is
peculiar and distinct.
</p>

<p>
(2) The <hi rend='italic'>Vocabulary</hi> and constructional forms of cc. i, ii are also
characteristic of the Gospel as a whole. Burkitt (<hi rend='italic'>Evan. Da-Meph.</hi>,
ii, p. 259) instances eight words from these chapters as
<q>characteristic Matthaean words</q>. These words are given below.
The statistics have been obtained by tracing the record of the
words in Moulton and Geden's <hi rend='italic'>Concordance</hi> (doubtful cases and
quotations being omitted).
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{1.3cm} p{1.3cm} p{1.3cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(10) lw(10) lw(10)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Instances in Mt. i, ii.</cell>
     <cell>Instances in Mt. iii-xxviii.</cell>
     <cell>Instances in the rest of the NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>ἀναχωρεῖν</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>6</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell>λεγόμενος (with names)</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>11</cell>
     <cell>Mk. (1), Lk. (2), Jn. (8), Ac. (2), Pl. (4), Heb. (1).</cell></row>
<row><cell>ὄναρ</cell><cell>5</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>0</cell></row>
<row><cell>πληροῦσθαι</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>ῥηθέν</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>0</cell></row>
<row><cell>σφόδρα</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>6</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell>τότε</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>86</cell><cell>67</cell></row>
<row><cell>φαίνεσθαι</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>9</cell><cell>9</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
In addition to the list given by Burkitt, we may note also the
following:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3cm} p{1.3cm} p{1.3cm} p{1.3cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(20) lw(10) lw(10) lw(10)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Instances in Mt. i, ii.</cell>
     <cell>Instances in Mt. iii-xxviii.</cell>
     <cell>Mt, as compared with the rest of the NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>παραλαμβάνειν</cell><cell>6</cell><cell>10</cell><cell>1/3 of NT. Record.</cell></row>
<row><cell>προσκυνεῖν</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>9</cell><cell>1/4 of NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>προσφέρειν</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>13</cell><cell>1/3 of NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>συνάγειν</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>23</cell><cell>2/5 of NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>ὅριον</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>5</cell><cell>1/2 of NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>θησαυρός</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>1/2 of NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>δῶρον</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>1/2 of NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>ἐπάνω</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>7</cell><cell>2/5 of NT.</cell></row>
<row><cell>χρυσός</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>1/2 of NT.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Other words which repay examination are κατοικεῖν, ὅπως,
ἐνθυμέομαι, ἐξετάζω, τελευτάω.
</p>

<p>
The argument is not, of course, that no one but the First
Evangelist could have used these words&mdash;that would be absurd;
but that they are words which he uses frequently, and in nearly
every case more frequently than any other New Testament
writer.<note place='foot'>Sir J. C. Hawkins points out (HS., 2nd Ed., p. 9) that the <q>characteristic</q> words
and phrases of Mt. are <q>used considerably more freely in these two chapters
than in the rest of the book</q>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>

<p>
An interesting fact is instanced by W. C. Allen (op. cit.,
p. lxxxvi). He notes as a characteristic of the Gospel <q>a tendency
to repeat a phrase or construction two or three times at short
intervals</q>. Fifteen examples of this are given, one of which occurs
in Mt. ii. This last is an instance in which the genitive absolute
is followed in three cases by ἰδού (ii. 1, 13, 19). We may add
that the same construction appears in i. 20. Sir J. C. Hawkins
shows (HS., 2nd Ed., pp. 5, 31) that there are seven instances of this
construction in the rest of Mt., as compared with a single case in
Lk. One other detail of construction may be noted. More than
half the New Testament record of ἕως ἄν with the subjunctive
(which occurs in ii. 13) belongs to the First Gospel.
</p>

<p>
On the other side, we have to set down the fact that in Mt. i, ii
there are some twenty-eight words, exclusive of proper nouns,
which do not occur in the rest of the Gospel.<note place='foot'>ἀκριβόω, ἀκριβώς, ἀναιρέω, ἀνακάμπτω, βασιλεύω, βίβλος, γένεσις, γινώσκω
(in sense used), δειγματίζω, δεκατέσσαρες, διετής, ἐπάν, θνήσκω, θυμόομαι, κατωτέρω,
λάθρᾳ, λίβανος, μάγοι, μεθερμηνεύομαι, μετοικεσία, μνηστεύομαι, πυνθάνομαι,
σμύρνα, συνέρχομαι, τελευτῄ, τίκτω, ὕπνος, χρηματίζω.</note> But nearly half
of these are accounted for by the subject-matter. The remaining
instances are not more numerous than we might naturally expect.
On the other hand, if cc. i, ii are a later insertion, we could
reasonably look for more.
</p>

<p>
So far, then, as the linguistic facts will take us, we may say
that, considered as a whole, they support the view that Mt. i, ii
are from the same hand as the rest of the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
(3) The <hi rend='italic'>mode of treatment</hi> in these chapters is that of the
First Evangelist. This writer is distinguished by the marked
interest which he takes in describing the new faith as the true
fulfilment of the old. This characteristic appears in the quotations
which he makes from the Old Testament. Among these there
are twelve which stand out distinct.<note place='foot'>i. 22 f., ii. 5 f., ii. 15, ii. 17 f., ii. 23, iii. 3, iv. 14 ff., viii. 17, xii. 17-21,
xiii. 35, xxi. 4 f., xxvii. 9. Of these iii. 3 differs somewhat from the rest, and
ii. 23 cannot be identified with any single OT. passage.</note> (i) In each case they are
preceded by the words, <q>in order that that which was spoken by
the prophets might be fulfilled</q>, or words to that effect. (ii) With
one exception (iii. 3), they are quoted in this Gospel alone.
(iii) What is more important, most of them are based upon the
Hebrew, whereas the remaining quotations in the Gospel (except
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
xi. 10) are taken from the Septuagint.<note place='foot'>See especially Stanton (GHD., ii, p. 343); also Allen (op. cit., p. lxii)
and Burkitt (GHT., pp. 124 ff.).</note> For our present purpose
the significant thing is that these characteristic quotations are
distributed throughout the whole of the Gospel. No less than
five of them occur in cc. i, ii, and it is not too much to say that
their presence is a kind of water-mark authenticating the genuineness
of these chapters.
</p>

<p>
Combining the foregoing arguments we may justly claim that
the hypothesis of interpolation is violent in the extreme.
Dr. Moffatt sums up a very widely accepted view when he says:
<q>Neither the style nor contents of 1-2 afford valid evidence
for suspecting that they are a later insertion in the gospel</q>
(INT., p. 250).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Unity of Mt. i, ii</head>

<p>
The arguments used in the preceding section are sufficient to
show that cc. i, ii, as a whole, come from the Evangelist's hand.
But this conclusion does not exclude the possibility that certain
parts may be of later date. In particular, it could be said, and
has in fact been claimed that the Genealogy, the passage i. 18-25,
or both, are interpolations; and that originally the First Gospel
knew nothing of the Virgin Birth. These questions must now
be treated.
</p>

<p>
There is not the same need for us to examine the section
describing the visit of the Wise Men and its sequel (c. ii). This
section is of great importance in a discussion of the Nativity
narratives, but in relation to the Virgin Birth it is secondary as
compared with the Genealogy and the passage i. 18-25. The
section is treated by Canon Box in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Jesus</hi>,
pp. 19-33.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The Genealogy</head>

<p>
We are not concerned to ask at this point whether the
Genealogy ever existed independently of the Gospel, and is thus
a source which the Evangelist has worked up and incorporated
in his own work. The question we have to consider is whether
Mt. i. 1-17 is a genuine part of the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
The case in favour of this view is overwhelmingly strong. Its
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
weight lies in the fact that the peculiar characteristics of the
Genealogy (p. 89 f.) are the peculiar characteristics of the rest of
the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
(1) This is manifest in the strong interest taken in the Davidic
Sonship. <q>The Gospel according to Matthew may be called
<hi rend='italic'>The Book of Jesus Christ, the Son of David</hi> ... The special aim
of Matthew, in one word, is to represent our Lord as the legitimate
Heir of the royal house of David</q> (Burkitt, <hi rend='italic'>Evan. Da-Meph.</hi>, ii,
p. 259). We may partially illustrate this claim by the New
Testament record of the term <q>Son of David</q>. There are 8
instances in Mt. other than i. 1, and 6 in the rest of the New
Testament (3 in Mk. and 3 in Lk.). The regal aspect of
Christ's Sonship is also illustrated in Mt. xix. 28, xxv. 34 (cf.
Allen, op. cit., p. lxiv).
</p>

<p>
(2) As regards the artificial structure of the Genealogy, we
may note that this too is characteristic of the First Evangelist's
manner. He is fond of arranging his material in groups of
threes. Allen enumerates twenty-three instances outside cc. i, ii
(ib., p. lxv). Similarly the double seven reflects <q>the author's
penchant for that sacred number</q> (Moffatt, INT., p. 250, who
notes four other examples (p. 257)).
</p>

<p>
(3) We are unable to illustrate from the rest of the Gospel the
legal use of γεννάω, but where else save in the Genealogy could
we expect to find it? It is the unique character of the Genealogy
which requires that usage. On the other hand, the point of
view which determines the usage is the point of view of cc. i, ii
as a whole. As in i. 1-17, so in i. 18-ii. 23, the standpoint is
that of a writer who desires to combine two diverse beliefs, the
Virgin Birth and the Messiahship of Jesus.
</p>

<p>
(4) The apologetic motive manifest in the Genealogy is also
characteristic of the First Gospel. Not only is the same motive
present in every section of cc. i, ii, but in other connexions and
in every part of the Gospel, the desire to defend and to interpret
is evident; notably this is the case in the story of the Baptism,
the account of the Guard at the Tomb and the Resurrection
narratives.<note place='foot'>Cf. Burkitt, op. cit., ii. p. 259; Box, op. cit., pp. 11, 19 ff.; Moffatt,
INT., p. 259; Lake, <hi rend='italic'>The Historical Evidence for the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ</hi>, pp. 178 ff.</note>
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
(5) The nature of the Genealogy leaves little room for the
linguistic test. <q>Yet even here we have the characteristic λεγόμενος
in <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> 16, and the objective way that the writer speaks of
<q>the Christ</q> in <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> 17 is quite in the manner of Mt. xi. 2</q> (Burkitt,
op. cit., p. 259).
</p>

<p>
Taken together these arguments justify us in concluding that
Mt. i. 1-17 comes from the Evangelist's pen.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The Passage Mt. i. 18-25</head>

<p>
It is this passage which leads us to the heart of the whole
question, for here, in the angelic message to Joseph, the Virgin
Birth is asserted unmistakably.
</p>

<p>
We should be justified in making use of the results we have
already obtained. If the Genealogy comes from the hand of the
Evangelist, and if it is of the character we have alleged, there
can be no question but that Mt. i. 18-25 is also a genuine part
of the Gospel. In view, however, of the importance of the
section, it may be well not to avail ourselves of this argument.
</p>

<p>
Schmiedel's objections to the passage (EB., col. 2959 f.) may
not unfairly be summarized as follows: (i) Mt. xiii. 55 (<q>Is not
this the carpenter's son?</q>) <q>directly contradicts the theory of the
Virgin Birth</q>, (ii) Mt. ii can be understood without presupposing
the story, (iii) Bethlehem is not mentioned until ii. 1, (iv) Mt. i.
18-25 is not from the same hand as the Genealogy, which <q>could
never have been drawn up after Joseph had ceased to be regarded
as the real father of Jesus</q>.
</p>

<p>
Of these arguments the last arises out of Schmiedel's view of
the Genealogy, which is, that in its original form in the Gospel
it asserted the physical paternity of Joseph (the Virgin Birth
being a later insertion). Needless to say, on this view, Mt. i. 18-25
must be rejected. We have already discussed the nature of the
Genealogy, and have seen reason to take a totally different view
of it. The Genealogy, as we understand it, furnishes no ground
of objection to i. 18-25, but rather the contrary. Nor do
Schmiedel's remaining objections carry the weight claimed.
</p>

<p>
(1) As we have observed on p. 31, Mt. xiii. 55 simply reflects
the opinions of our Lord's contemporaries. Unless we make the
gratuitous assumption that the Evangelist would never have
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
reflected a view which he did not himself share, we are not
justified in raising an objection to i. 18-25 from this particular
passage.
</p>

<p>
(2) As regards c. ii, it is true that what is there related can, if
necessary, be understood without presuming the story of i. 18-25.
Nevertheless, the chapter is quite congruous with what is told in
that passage, and, indeed, agrees better with the presupposition
of the Virgin Birth. In a narrative written from the standpoint
of Joseph, we may note that, while Mary is spoken of no less
than five times as the mother of Jesus (ii. 11, 13, 14, 20, 21),
wherever Joseph is mentioned, we have invariably the quite
neutral expression <q>the young child</q> (ii. 13, 14, 20, 21). Also
the quotation, <q>Out of Egypt did I call my son</q> (ii. 15), by the
very reason of its exegetical violence, is more intelligible if the
Evangelist has already narrated the story of the supernatural
birth. To have real weight, Schmiedel's objection should be
able to point to more than the fact that c. ii can be read <q>without
the presupposition of the virgin birth</q>. If i. 18-25 is an interpolation,
we might reasonably expect statements in c. ii inconsistent
with that passage. And, moreover, it would be gratuitous
to say that they have been carefully suppressed, in view of those
which survive in Lk. i, ii to which we have called attention in
Chapter II.
</p>

<p>
(3) That Bethlehem is not mentioned until ii. 1 is true. But
as an objection to i. 18-25 this fact would be of significance, if
the latter were simply a narrative of the birth of Jesus. But to
assert this is to mistake its character, which is didactic and apologetic.
Joseph rather than Jesus is the central figure of the
section; the birth is not announced until the closing words.
The reference to Bethlehem in ii. 1 is certainly abrupt, but it
would have been quite as abrupt in i. 25. Nothing in i. 18-25,
if we have regard to its character, requires a reference to
Bethlehem within the passage.
</p>

<p>
The onus of proof really rests upon those who deny the
genuineness of i. 18-25. It may not be without advantage,
however, to set down reasons which lead us to believe that the
passage comes from the Evangelist's hand.
</p>

<p>
(a) As in the case of Lk. i. 34 f. there is <hi rend='italic'>no textual authority
for the omission of these verses</hi>. While we recognize the free
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
handling which the text of the Gospels may have received during
the first half of the second century, it does not appear likely on
general grounds that Mt. i. 18-25 is an interpolation. The
addition to the text of a saying of Christ, or of a comment, or
even of an incident drawn from floating Christian tradition, we
can understand, as well as a certain amount of stylistic alteration.
<q>Doctrinal modifications</q>, however, of such a wholesale character
as the present instance would be, if the passage is a later insertion
of unknown origin, are quite another matter. That Mt. i. 18-25
should have been inserted in a Gospel, which, on this theory,
taught the physical paternity of Joseph, and should have been
inserted without leaving traces in the literature of the early
Christian centuries, is most improbable. The sole support from
early Christian literature is the statement of Epiphanius that the
text used by Cerinthus lacked the passage. Had we more
information of this kind, there would be ground for the theory
of interpolation; as it is, the basis is too slender and uncertain.<note place='foot'>For the reference to Epiphanius see an article by F. C. Conybeare, HJ.,
i, p. 96. Conybeare's main argument is drawn from the edition of the
<hi rend='italic'>Dialogue of Timothy and Aquila</hi>, published by himself (1898). He thinks
that the Dialogue <q>reflects an age when [Mt. i. 18-25] had already been
introduced, but was not present in all the copies</q> (p. 100). If we accept the
view advocated by F. C. Burkitt (<hi rend='italic'>Evan. Da-Meph.</hi>, ii. 265) this inference is
not necessary. See Appendix to present chapter, p. 106.</note>
</p>

<p>
(b) <hi rend='italic'>The standpoint and mode of treatment in Mt. i. 18-25 is
that of cc. i, ii, and of the Evangelist.</hi> As in the rest of cc. i, ii,
it is the didactic and apologetic interest that is uppermost. Joseph
is the central figure, and there is the same use of <q>the machinery
of dreams</q> as in c. ii, and in the story of Pilate's wife (xxvii. 19).
</p>

<p>
(c) <hi rend='italic'>The same may be said of the vocabulary and the style.</hi>
Six words appear which are not found elsewhere in the Gospel,<note place='foot'>Γινώσκω (in sense used, but the phrase in which it occurs is probably an
insertion, Burkitt, ib., ii, p. 261), δειγματίζω, μεθερμηνεύομαι, μνηστεύομαι,
συνέρχομαι, ὕπνος.</note>
but with the exception of one (μεθερμηνεύομαι), they are sufficiently
explained by the peculiar subject-matter. On the other
hand, there are at least five <q>characteristic Matthaean words</q>,<note place='foot'>Ὄναρ, παραλαμβάνειν, πληροῦσθαι, ῥηθέν, φαίνεσθαι.</note>
while other features distinctive of the First Evangelist appear in
the opening words of verse 20, the reference to Joseph as the
<q>son of David</q>, the phrase <q>Behold, an angel of the Lord</q>, and
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
especially the quotation of verse 23 with its introductory
formula.
</p>

<p>
In view of these arguments, it is not too much to apply to
Mt. i. 18-25 what Burkitt says of Mt. i. 18-ii. 23. If the passage
<q>be not an integral part of the First Gospel, it must be counted
one of the cleverest of literary adaptations, a verdict that is
not likely to be passed on it by a sane criticism</q> (op. cit.,
ii. 259).
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Implications, Sources, and Results</head>

<p>
(1) In the earlier sections of this chapter an attempt has been
made to prove that the Virgin Birth is an original element in the
First Gospel. The suggestion that it is a later insertion from an
unknown hand breaks down on examination, and our conclusion
is that the doctrine was taught by the First Evangelist. There
is no need to raise the question whether the doctrine was a later
element introduced by the Evangelist himself into a work which
originally knew nothing of it, for there is absolutely no evidence
pointing in that direction. In this respect the passage Mt. i. 18-25
differs altogether from Lk. i. 34 f. Against the former passage
no inconsistencies, either in the immediate context or in the
Gospel as a whole, can be shown. From one end to the other
the narrative is governed by the same presuppositions and reflects
the same point of view.
</p>

<p>
Whether the Genealogy ever existed independently and in
another form is a view for which little can be said. There are
no grounds for this theory within the Genealogy as it stands, and
the textual problem of Mt. i. 16 does not require the supposition
(see pp. 105 ff.). The possibility cannot, of course, be
excluded. If the Evangelist did make use of an existing Genealogy,
it was probably one which implied the real paternity of
Joseph. In that case he has completely transformed it, and must
have done this either before, or at the time when he first wrote
cc. i, ii. But the existence of such a source is pure speculation.
It is more probable that the Genealogy is the Evangelist's own
composition, constructed not for historical but for didactic
purposes.<note place='foot'><q>I cannot believe that any document underlies it. On the contrary,
I believe it is the composition of the Evangelist himself</q> (Burkitt, <hi rend='italic'>Evan.
Da-Meph.</hi>, ii, p. 260). Cf. also Allen (ICC., St. Mt., p. 5).</note>
</p>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<p>
(2) The question of <hi rend='italic'>the implications of Mt. i, ii</hi> is one of great
interest. The narrative is very far from being an attempt to
relate the story of the Virgin Birth for the first time. On the
contrary, it is probable that the doctrine was already known to
the readers of the First Gospel, and that it had become a subject
of controversy. It is from this point of view that the Evangelist
writes; it is for this reason that he tells the story from the
standpoint of Joseph. It is not difficult to imagine the circumstances
under which the Matthaean narrative came to be written.
Once the story of the Virgin Birth had begun to circulate,
interest must soon have been aroused in the position and attitude
of Joseph. How were his natural fears allayed? What action
did he take? What became of the Davidic descent? Such
questions would press for answer. Outside the Christian community
these difficulties would inevitably become the occasion of
scandal, as the case was in later times. The Evangelist's narrative
is an attempt to meet these difficulties. His view, or the
view he reflects, is that the fears of Joseph were allayed by
a divine message. The subsequent action of Joseph, also under
angelic direction, was to complete the legal act of wedlock before
the child was born. The difficulty of the Davidic descent is the
problem attacked in the Genealogy. According to several writers
it is the same interest which governs the narratives of c. ii.
<q>... the Nativity Story shows us the alarm of the usurper Herod,
when he learns that the legitimate ruler has been born within his
dominions. As Saul tried to kill David, so Herod tries to kill
Jesus; and Jesus finds a refuge in Egypt, as David found a
refuge among the Philistines</q> (Burkitt, op. cit., ii. 259; cf. Box,
op. cit., p. 19).
</p>

<p>
(3) The question of <hi rend='italic'>the source or sources</hi> from which the
Evangelist obtained the narrative of Mt. i. 18-25 cannot be
adequately discussed in itself and in relation to the First Gospel
alone. Nevertheless it is worth while to ask how far we can go
within those limits. From the evidence supplied by the Gospel
itself, we cannot say that the narrative rests on the testimony of
Joseph. If the Virgin Birth is historically true, this view has
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
much probability in its favour. But to urge such an origin for
the Matthaean narrative, as part of the proof for the Virgin Birth,
is not permissible, since obviously it begs the question. Many
writers think that the narrative really does come from Joseph
himself because it reflects his standpoint. Amongst others this
is the opinion of Bishop Gore (<hi rend='italic'>The New Theology and the Old
Religion</hi>, p. 126 f.), and of Dr. Orr (<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Christ</hi>,
pp. 83 ff.).<note place='foot'>Sanday (<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, p. 196) writes: <q>In regard to the Matthaean document
we are in the dark. The curious gravitation of statement towards
Joseph has a reason; but beyond this there is not much that we can say. It
would not follow that the immediate source of the narrative was very near his
person.</q></note> Such a conclusion travels beyond the facts of the
case. That the narrative is written from Joseph's standpoint is,
of course, beyond question. It may be, however, that this fact is
sufficiently accounted for by the apologetic character of the
narrative. We do not say here that this is the case, but we do
say that to claim more is to put an outside interpretation upon
the narrative. Eventually this is, of course, inevitable; our final
conclusion reacts upon our view of the earlier problems; but in
the constructive stage this is a peril sedulously to be avoided.
</p>

<p>
The possibility has to be allowed that the narrative of Mt. i.
18-25 may be the result of an inference which arose within the
Christian community, and which has clothed itself in an imaginative
and pictorial form. In answer to the question, How were
the fears of Joseph allayed?, it would be natural to reply, By
a divine message, and current beliefs would supply an explanation
of the means and the method by which such a message
would be conveyed. Angelic mediation would account for the
one, just as revelation by a dream would explain the other.
</p>

<p>
The presence of <emph>inference</emph> in the Synoptic narratives is perhaps
not so widely recognized as it ought to be. Whether we ought to
be so ready as we often are to suppose the existence of special
information, documentary or oral, when the First Evangelist and
St. Luke add details to the Markan narrative, or relate entirely
new facts, is a pertinent question. In many cases there is much
justice in the supposition. In other cases it may easily be that
the new detail or narrative has been shaped by inferences playing
upon difficulties or ambiguities left by earlier narratives and
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
traditions.<note place='foot'><q>In the historical judgement of the Gospels this distinction between facts
and reflections has frequently to be remembered</q> (E. P. Gould, ICC.,
St. Mk., p. 37).</note> This would be a perfectly natural circumstance, the
existence of which would be more readily acknowledged if
obsolete theories of Inspiration did not continue to exact unlawful
tribute. In the case of the First Gospel this use of inference is
sometimes manifest, especially in the accounts of the Burial and
the Resurrection of Jesus.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Historical Evidence for the Resurrection of Jesus Christ</hi>, by
Professor Kirsopp Lake.</note> Whatever judgement may be passed
upon Prof. Kirsopp Lake's brilliant examination of the Resurrection
narratives, there can be little doubt but that he has shown
that inference, as well as information, shaped the formation of
early Christian tradition. This conclusion, even if accepted,
would not justify us in supposing that the narratives of Mt. i, ii
are nothing more than the inferential resolution of difficulties
left by the story of the Virgin Birth. But it would suffice to
make it probable that, to an extent which we may leave undefined,
inference did play its part, either in the mind of the
Evangelist or in the thought of the Christian community.
</p>

<p>
It is, indeed, quite possible to admit this view, and yet to hold
that behind the narrative there is a nucleus of historic fact.
Dr. Gore, who believes that the story goes back to Joseph, does
not hesitate to say:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>... to suppose such angelic appearances ... to be imaginative
outward representations of what were in fact real but inward
communications of the <q>divine word</q> to human souls, is both a
possible course and one which is quite consistent with accepting
the narrative as substantially historical and true</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Dissertations</hi>,
p. 22 f.).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Canon Box expresses a similar view when he writes:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>To us [the narrative] seems to exhibit in a degree that can
hardly be paralleled elsewhere in the New Testament the characteristic
features of Jewish Midrash and Haggada. It sets forth
certain facts and beliefs in a fanciful and imaginative setting,
specially calculated to appeal to Jews.... The task that confronts
the critical student is to disentangle the facts and beliefs&mdash;the
fundamental ground-factors on which the narration is built&mdash;from
their decorative embroidery</q> (op. cit., p. 12).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<p>
From what has been said above it will be seen that, if we
restrict ourselves to the First Gospel, there are three theories
possible regarding the source or sources employed in i. 18-25.
(i) The narrative, very much as it stands, may have come from
Joseph himself. (ii) Inference and imagination may have played
upon a nucleus of historic fact. (iii) The narrative may be a
story without historic foundation, which has grown up, as the
result of inference and imagination, in answer to difficulties
arising out of a belief in the Virgin Birth antecedently held.
</p>

<p>
So long as we confine ourselves to the Gospel, it is not possible
to choose between these views, unless we are prepared to assume
that early Christian tradition cannot have been mistaken&mdash;an
assumption which cuts the knot instead of untying it. As we
are not ready to make that assumption, we have to be content to
leave the possibilities open, and to regard the use of any one of
them in the historical inquiry as illegitimate. In part this is
a disappointing decision, but it is better to feel that we have
solid ground beneath our feet.
</p>

<p>
(4) The positive results to which we have been led are (i) that
<hi rend='italic'>the First Evangelist knew of, and believed in, the story of the
Virgin Birth</hi>; and (ii) that <hi rend='italic'>the belief was shared by his readers,
and had been held sufficiently long for some of its problems to be
raised</hi>. Unquestionably, this is an important result, and its
place in the historical problem will fall to be considered later.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix To Chapter V. The Textual Problem of Mt. i. 16</head>

<div>
<head>I.</head>

<p>
Important and well-known discussions of the textual problem
of Mt. i. 16 are those of Sanday (<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, pp. 197-200); P. W.
Schmiedel (EB., col. 2961 ff.); F. C. Burkitt (<hi rend='italic'>Evan. Da-Meph.</hi>,
ii, pp. 258-66); W. C. Allen (ICC., <hi rend='italic'>St. Mt.</hi>, p. 8); G. H. Box (<hi rend='italic'>The
Virgin Birth of Jesus</hi>, pp. 215-18).<note place='foot'>Unless otherwise stated further references to these writers are to the
works cited above.</note> For purposes of reference,
the most important facts may be summarized as follows:
</p>

<p>
(A) First, we have the <hi rend='italic'>text followed in the A V. and R V.</hi>, which
reads: Ἰακὼβ δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ἰωσὴφ τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας, ἐξ ἧς
ἐγεννήθη Ἰησοῦς ὁ λεγόμενος Χριστός. This is the text of all
extant uncials, very many minuscules, and many versions (Sanday).
<q>It is definitely attested by Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>De Carne Christi</hi>, § 20</q>
(Burkitt).
</p>

<p>
(B) A different text is attested by the <hi rend='italic'><q>Ferrar</q> Group</hi>. It is
implied by a number of important MSS. of the <hi rend='italic'>Old Latin Version</hi>,
by the <hi rend='italic'>Armenian</hi>, and by the <hi rend='italic'>Curetonian Syriac</hi>. This text is as
follows: Ἰακὼβ δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ἰωσὴφ ᾧ μνηστευθεῖσα παρθένος
Μαριὰμ ἐγέννησεν Ἰησοῦν τὸν λεγόμενον Χριστόν.
</p>

<p>
(C) Thirdly, we have the <hi rend='italic'>Sinaitic Syriac</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> reads:
<q>Jacob begat Joseph; Joseph, to whom was betrothed Mary the
Virgin, begat Jesus, who is called Christ,</q> and implies Ἰακὼβ δὲ
ἐγ. τὸν Ἰωσήφ· Ἰωσὴφ [δὲ] ᾧ μνηστευθεῖσα [ἦν] π. Μ. ἐγέννησεν
Ἰ. τὸν λεγ. Χ. (Burkitt, p. 263). [The reading of the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Cur.</hi>
is: <q>Jacob begat Joseph, him to whom was betrothed Mary the
Virgin, <emph>she</emph> who bare Jesus the Messiah</q>.] We may also mention
here the passage from the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogue of Timothy and Aquila</hi> which
Conybeare claims to be the true text of Mt. i. 16. The alleged
quotation includes the text as given under (A) together with the
words, <q>And Joseph begat Jesus who is called Christ</q>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<div>
<head>II.</head>

<p>
(1) Conybeare's claim, mentioned above, has failed to win
general acceptance. It is rejected by Schmiedel,<note place='foot'>Cf. also Moffatt, p. 251; Sanday (<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, p. 197); W. C. Allen, p. 8.</note> who justly
asks, <q>How can we suppose that an evangelist deliberately added
the second half to the first?</q> (col. 2961). Schmiedel's view is
that in the passage cited from the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogue</hi> <q>it is precisely the
youngest text and the oldest which have found a place peaceably
side by side in one and the same line</q>. F. C. Burkitt's theory
probably gives the best explanation. He does not think that
<q><hi rend='italic'>And Joseph begat Jesus who is called Christ</hi></q> is meant to be
a part of the quotation of Mt. i. 16, but is simply the inference
of the Jew. <q><hi rend='italic'>The Jew quotes the Genealogy and then draws his
inference, which is of course repudiated by the Christian disputant</hi></q>
(p. 265). Accepting this view we may leave the supposed quotation
outside our discussion. We may note, however, that,
according to Burkitt, the second of two other quotations of
Mt. i. 16 in the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogue</hi> is interesting <q>as affording an actual
proof that the phrase <q><hi rend='italic'>husband of Mary</hi></q> was liable to change</q>.
(p. 265).
</p>

<p>
(2) G. H. Box regards the <hi rend='italic'>Curetonian Syriac</hi> as <q>an interpretation
rather than a translation of the Greek text given us by the
<q>Ferrar</q> Group</q> (p. 216). Burkitt thinks it is <q>like an attempt
to rewrite the text of <hi rend='italic'>S</hi></q> (p. 263), but as he derives the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi>
from the same Group,<note place='foot'><q>The reading of <hi rend='italic'>S</hi> itself I have come to regard as nothing more than a
paraphrase of the reading of the <q>Ferrar Group</q>, the Syriac translator taking
ᾡ to refer to ἐγέννησεν as well as to μνηστευθεῖσα</q> (p. 263).</note> his opinion leads to the same result.
Directly or indirectly <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Cur.</hi> is a witness for the text (B). As
such its general character in Mt. i, ii needs to be taken into
account. In i. 20 it has <q>thy betrothed</q> instead of <q>thy wife</q>.
It omits <q>her husband</q> in i. 19. In i. 24 it substitutes <q>Mary</q>
for <q>thy wife</q>. In i. 25 it shares with the <hi rend='italic'>Diatessaron</hi> the reading
<q>purely dwelling with her</q>, and it renders ἐκάλεσεν by <q>she
called</q>. It is clear that its text is <hi rend='italic'>dominated by a desire to assert
unmistakably the historic fact of the Virgin Birth</hi>.
</p>

<p>
(3) W. C. Allen takes the Greek text implied in the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi>
to be the true text of Mt. i. 16. Burkitt, as we have seen, derives
it from (B). For the present it is important to consider <hi rend='italic'>the
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
character of the Syr.-Sin. in relation to the Virgin Birth</hi>. In
i. 21, with the <hi rend='italic'>Curetonian</hi>, it adds the words, <q>to thee</q>. In i. 25
it omits <q>knew her not until</q>, and, as in the English versions, it
renders ἐκάλεσεν by the masculine; in the same verse it also has
the reading, <q>she bore him a son</q>. At first sight it would appear
as if the tendency of the MS. is in direct opposition to the
doctrine of the Virgin Birth; it is, however, very questionable if
this is the case. It is not improbable that <q>he knew her not
until</q> (omitted also by the Old Lat. <hi rend='italic'>k</hi>) is an interpolation in the
First Gospel. Burkitt thinks that <q>to thee</q> in i. 21 appeared in
the <hi rend='italic'>Evangelion Da-Mepharreshe</hi>, and that <q>him</q> is a <q>mere
stylistic addition</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> When we add that this MS.
includes Mt. i. 18-25, and the parenthesis, <q>to whom was betrothed
Mary the Virgin</q>, in Mt. i. 16, it becomes impossible to suppose
that its text is of <q>Ebionite origin</q>. Nor is it any more likely
that it represents <q>the slip of a scribe</q>. It is too much of a piece
with the entire representation of the MS., of which the most we
can say is that it hardens the unique point of view which is
characteristic of the Evangelist himself. Whether it represents
the original ending of the Genealogy, in a form independent of,
and earlier than, the First Gospel, is a point which may be left
open, though the view is not one which otherwise finds support
from the Genealogy, as it now appears in the Gospel.<note place='foot'>The foregoing three alternatives are those noted by Dr. Sanday (<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>,
p. 199 f.), between which, he says, <q>the data do not allow us to decide
absolutely</q>.</note> In any
case, <hi rend='italic'>we ought very probably to reject the view that the Syr.-Sin.
in Mt. i. 16 asserts, or implies, the physical paternity of Joseph</hi>.
It clearly takes ᾧ to <q>refer to ἐγέννησεν as well as μνηστευθεῖσα</q>
(Burkitt, p. 263), but, having regard to its character as a whole,
the strong probability is that it interprets ἐγέννησεν in the same
sense which it bears throughout the earlier links of the Genealogy,
viz. of legal parentage (Allen, p. 8). <hi rend='italic'>In this case the scribe who
produced the Syr.-Sin. has remained truer to the mind and spirit
of the First Evangelist than any other early Christian writer we
know.</hi> Whether he has preserved the letter is more open to
question.
</p>

<p>
(4) As regards the rendering (B), it is sufficient to say that the
<q>Ferrar</q> Group and the Old Lat. MSS., while representing a text
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
which differs from (A), <hi rend='italic'>agree in affirming the Virgin Birth</hi>. Some
of them do so with emphasis (e.g. <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>). All of them (except
<hi rend='italic'>q</hi>) contain the word <q>Virgin</q>, but, with the exception of <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>,
the connexion between ᾧ (<foreign rend='italic'>cui</foreign>) and μνηστευθεῖσα (<foreign rend='italic'>desponsata</foreign>) is
left ambiguous.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>III.</head>

<p>
We are left, then, with three readings, for each of which priority
may be claimed (those we have indicated by (A) and (B), and
that of the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> (C)). It is highly probable that (C) is derived
from (B); but it may be well to leave this an open question, so
as to have all the possibilities before us.
</p>

<p>
(1) <hi rend='italic'>Can we, then, explain the textual facts already noticed, if we
presume the originality of</hi> (A)?
</p>

<p>
It is certainly remarkable that, after using ἐγέννησεν in a legal
sense throughout the earlier links of the Genealogy (Moffatt,
Burkitt, Westcott, Box, Allen, Barnard, A. J. Maclean), the
compiler should desert this practice, and use the verb of physical
parentage (ἐγεννήθη) in the last link of the chain. The compiler,
if we may say so, does not strike us as the kind of man who
would have felt the need of this. It seems much more likely
that, together with some qualifying clause in reference to Mary,
he would have continued to employ ἐγέννησεν in the same sense
to the end. This is conjecture; but (on the present theory) it is
a conjecture supported by the procedure of the scribes who have
produced (B). Their object (on the present supposition) will
have been to remove the ambiguities of (A) in Mt. i. 16, so as to
state the doctrine more clearly. We could understand, then,
their objection to τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας, and the change to ᾧ μνηστευθεῖσα
π. Μ. What is less easy to understand is the change
from ἐγεννήθη to ἐγέννησεν. It is true that ἐξ ἧς ἐγεννήθη is
not without ambiguity, as the comment of the Jew in the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogue
of Timothy and Aquila</hi> shows.<note place='foot'>Referring to the Evangelist the Jew objects: <q>He says begat out of
Mary</q> (cf. Conybeare, HJ., vol. i, no. 1, p. 100).</note> But, if this was a ground of
objection, why should the ambiguity be replaced by one that is
much greater? As we have seen, the construction of (B) is singularly
loose. It is this fact which has clearly invited the modifications
represented in the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Cur.</hi> and the Old Lat. MSS., and
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
perhaps the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> itself. The reading (B) certainly does not
commend itself as a doctrinal modification of (A). Further, the
priority of (A) does not help us to account for (C). If, as we
believe, (C) is derived from (B), it is needless to discuss the point.
But apart from that theory of the origin of (C), our conclusion
remains the same. We have seen how near in spirit the scribe
of the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> was to the First Evangelist. Can we suppose,
then, that he would have demurred to the words, τὸν ἄνδρα
Μαρίας? It is very difficult to think so. For these reasons, in
spite of its strong attestation, we find it impossible to presume
the originality of (A).
</p>

<p>
(2) <hi rend='italic'>We reach a similar conclusion, if we assume</hi> (B) <hi rend='italic'>to be the
true text of Mt. i. 16.</hi> Its singular construction does not readily
suggest the craftsmanship of the compiler of the Genealogy. It
is true that we can give a very good account of (C) on the present
assumption. We can adopt Burkitt's suggestion, and regard it as
a paraphrase of (B). But can we derive (A) from (B)? It would
be reasonable to explain ἐξ ἧς ἐγεννήθη as a correction of
ἐγέννησεν by a believer who failed to understand the Evangelist's
point of view, and who desired a clearer reference to the Virgin
Birth. But can we imagine a scribe, or an editor, motived in
this way, replacing <q>to whom was betrothed the Virgin Mary</q> by
the words <q>the husband of Mary</q>? The question answers itself,
and forbids the assumption of the priority of (B).
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>Can we, then</hi>, accept Archdeacon Willoughby C. Allen's
view, and <hi rend='italic'>find the true text in</hi> (C)?<note place='foot'>We ought to add that Allen leaves open the possibility that the parenthesis
may be a later addition, and that the original text may have been <q>And
Joseph begat Jesus</q>. <q>It seems probable ... that the text underlying S<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> is
the nearest approach now extant to the original Greek, and it must remain
possible that even here the relative clause is an insertion</q> (p. 8).</note> It is quite possible, on this
theory, to give a reasonable explanation of (B), but, as in the last
case, the difficulty is to account for (A). We can follow the
change from ἐγέννησεν to ἐξ ἧς ἐγεννήθη, but the substitution of
τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας for the parenthesis found in (C) remains as
before an insuperable objection. At the same time Archdeacon
Allen has laid down a true and a valuable principle when he
writes: <q>The earliest Greek form was gradually altered from
a desire to avoid words which, though in the intention of the
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
writer they expressed legal parentage, not paternity, in fact,
might be misunderstood by thoughtless readers</q> (p. 8).
</p>

<p>
Our results thus far are negative, but they are not barren.
We have frankly to admit that <hi rend='italic'>no extant reading, as a whole,
commends itself as the original text of Mt. i. 16</hi>. On the other
hand, <hi rend='italic'>we can form a reasonably good idea of what that text was
like</hi>. If we are to make any further advance, we must have recourse
to <emph>conjecture</emph>. It is not at all impossible that future discoveries
may enable us to travel upon firmer ground. Such
a discovery as that of the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> MS. by Mrs. Lewis and
Mrs. Gibson in 1902 shows that this hope is not unreasonable.
But meantime, unless we are content to acquiesce in a negative
conclusion, we have no choice but to resort to conjecture. This
does not mean a leap in the dark. It is in every way likely that
parts of the true text are embedded in the extant readings, and
it is by no means impossible that, taken together, these readings
may contain the whole. <hi rend='italic'>It may be, that is to say, that the true
text of Mt. i. 16 has found its grave in the readings we possess.</hi>
Whether its resurrection can be accomplished is another question.
But, in view of the general character of the true text, as indicated
above, the attempt need not be foreclosed. Obviously, our results
will be tentative, but they should be something more than
dubious and uncertain in the extreme.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>IV.</head>

<p>
In attempting to reconstruct the true text of Mt. i. 16, we may
venture the following suggestions:
</p>

<p>
(1) <hi rend='italic'>We have very good ground for regarding</hi> τὸν. λ. Χ. <hi rend='italic'>as part
of the true text</hi> (though whether we read the nom. or the acc.
depends upon whether we prefer ἐγεννήθη or ἐγέννησεν). Not
only does this expression occur both in (A) and (B), but it is also
one which we should naturally expect the Genealogy to contain.
A Genealogy constructed to show the Messiahship of Jesus ends
fittingly with the words <q>who is called Christ</q>.
</p>

<p>
(2) <hi rend='italic'>It is very probable indeed that the original text included</hi>
ἐγέννησεν and not ἐγεννήθη. (i) On this view, we can readily
understand the misconceptions that would arise, and give a reasonable
explanation of the textual variants which exist. (ii) As
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
indicating legal parentage, the expression is not one from which
we think the compiler would be likely to shrink. (iii) It is not
easy to suppose that those who have employed ἐγέννησεν in the
reading (B) would have used this form if they had not found it
already in the text.
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>It is probable that Mt. i. 16 contained a reference to Mary.</hi>
This view is supported by the earlier references to women in the
Genealogy. <q>It is inconceivable that the Evangelist, who thought
it served the purpose that he had in hand to mention Thamar,
Rahab, Ruth, and Uriah's wife, should leave the step containing
Joseph bare</q> (Burkitt, p. 264).
</p>

<p>
(4) <hi rend='italic'>Of the two qualifying clauses open to us</hi>, τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας
<hi rend='italic'>is more likely to be the older</hi>. (i) It is an expression such as we
can easily suppose the First Evangelist would use (cf. Mt. i. 19).
(ii) It safeguards the Virgin Birth; there would be no point in
describing Joseph as <q><hi rend='italic'>the husband of Mary</hi></q> unless that expression
bore some special meaning. (iii) In the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogue of Timothy and
Aquila</hi> we possess <q>actual proof</q> that the phrase was <q>liable to
change</q> (Burkitt, quoted above, p. 106). (iv) The expression
could easily be misunderstood at a time when the interest in the
Davidic Sonship was no longer paramount. (v) In that case
the phrase ᾧ μνηστ. π. Μ. would commend itself as a doctrinal
modification. (vi) It would be altogether less easy to say this of
τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας.
</p>

<p>
(5) <hi rend='italic'>It is probable that Joseph was mentioned twice.</hi> (i) This
conclusion follows of necessity, if, as we have argued, ἐγέννησεν
and not ἐγεννήθη is original. (ii) It is implied in the earlier
steps of the Genealogy. (iii) It is attested by the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi>, and
the omission of the second Ἰωσήφ in (A) and (B) is not difficult
to explain (see later).
</p>

<p>
(6) <hi rend='italic'>It is on the whole more probable that</hi> τὸν ἄνδρα Μ. <hi rend='italic'>followed
the first</hi> Ἰωσήφ <hi rend='italic'>and not the second</hi>. (i) This view is supported
by the compiler's method. <q>The practice of the writer is to
interpose no words between the name and the verb ἐγέννησεν</q>
(Burkitt, p. 263). (ii) This order enables us to give an explanation
of the fact that both (A) and (B) omit the second Ἰωσήφ
(see below).
</p>

<p>
Gathering together these several results, we obtain the following
as the reconstructed text of Mt. i. 16:
</p>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<lg>
<l>Ἰακὼβ δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ἰωσὴφ τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας;</l>
<l>Ἰωσὴφ δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ἰησοῦν τὸν λεγόμενον Χριστόν.</l>
</lg>

<p>
In addition to the reasons already given, we may also urge the
fact that, with this text posited, we can give the simplest and
least involved account of the origin of (A), (B), (C).
</p>

<p>
(1) The scribes who have produced (A) substituted the passive
(ἐγεννήθη) for the active (ἐγέννησεν). This caused the second
Ἰωσήφ to drop out, its place being taken by ἐξ ἧς <q>from whom</q>
(fem.). Ἰησοῦς ὁ λεγ. Χρ. followed as a grammatical change.
</p>

<p>
(2) All that the originators of (B) had to do was to substitute
ᾧ μνηστ. π. Μ. for τὸν ἄνδρα Μ., and then, by omitting Ἰωσὴφ
δέ, to leave Μ. as the subject of ἐγέννησεν.
</p>

<p>
(3) We may explain (C), with Burkitt, as derived from (B).
The Syriac translator was not satisfied with the loose construction
of (B). Taking ᾧ to refer to ἐγέννησεν as well as to
μνηστευθεῖσα, he made the connexion clearer by inserting a second
Ἰωσήφ as the subject of the verb. In taking this last step, he
either returned unconsciously to part at least of the true reading,
or had access to good Greek MSS. which we no longer possess.
</p>

<p>
It is of interest to compare the reading we have suggested as
the original text of Mt. i. 16 with others which have been put
forward. In discussing one of these possibilities, Sanday writes
(<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>, p. 200): <q>If we may suppose that the original text ran
Ἰωσὴφ τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας ἣ ἐγέννησεν Ἰησοῦν τὸν λεγόμενον
Χριστόν, that would perhaps account for the two divergent lines
of variants better than any other</q>. In spite of its advantages,
this text suffers under two disadvantages from which the one we
have preferred is free. (i) Not only is γεννάω used in a different
sense from that which it has in the rest of the Genealogy, but it
is <emph>the very same form of the verb</emph> which is employed differently.
(ii) The reading is too smooth and clear. Apart from the phrase
τὸν ἄνδρα Μ. no loophole is left for misunderstanding, and so no
sufficient starting-point is provided for the subsequent textual
variants.
</p>

<p>
Burkitt has instanced the reading we have preferred. In rejecting
the view that the <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> represents the true text, he
writes (p. 264): <q>Had we such a text as Ἰακ. δὲ ἐγένν. τὸν Ἰωσὴφ
τὸν ἄνδρα Μαρίας· Ἰωσὴφ δὲ ἐγέννησεν κτλ. the case would have
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
been different</q>. In reference to this suggestion, however, Burkitt
says, (i) the evidence does not point that way, (ii) in that case the
<hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> would be further from the original than that of א B and
Tertullian, (iii) <hi rend='italic'>Syr.-Sin.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>k</hi> would <q>agree in a common
corruption</q>, and we should have to speak of the <q>Western</q> text in
the singular number.
</p>

<p>
The last point raises a large question which it is impossible to
consider here. As regards the second objection, while in some
respects (C) would be further from the original than (A), in other
and more important respects it would be appreciably nearer. In
its use of ἐγέννησεν it would be nearer to the original than any
reading we possess. As regards the first objection, we have
frankly to agree that the textual evidence does not point that
way. We cannot point to a shred of MS. evidence to support
the conjectured reading. A generation ago this would have been
considered a fatal objection. But, in view of the freedom with
which the text of the Gospels was handled during the first half of
the second century, and which the textual variants illustrate, this
objection can no longer be regarded as insuperable. So long as
we restrict ourselves to the attested readings, the problem remains
insoluble. If, then, we can reach a reasonable conclusion on
other lines, we are free to do so. Doubtless, in default of attestation,
we can describe our results as no more than tentative. But we
have no desire to claim more. As the problem stands at present,
the test to be applied is, What reading, conjectured or attested,
furnishes the best explanation of the facts at our disposal?, it
being remembered that these facts include, not only the textual
variants, but also the unique character of the Genealogy itself.
It may be, as we have suggested, that new discoveries await us.
But, unless we have entirely misread the evidence we already
possess, no discovery is to be expected which will completely
transform the textual problem.
</p>

<p>
In conclusion, we may state certain propositions (apart from
the question of the exact wording of the true text of Mt. i. 16)
which have in their favour a high degree of probability.
</p>

<p>
(1) The readings which we have called (A) and (B) are independent
attempts to alter the original text in the interests of the
Virgin Birth; that is, they are <q>doctrinal modifications</q>.
</p>

<p>
(2) The reading of the Sinaitic Syriac is not unfavourable to the
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
doctrine. It should no longer be spoken of as <q>the eccentric
reading</q>, nor should we describe the translator as influenced by
<q>heretical tendencies</q>.
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>The original text of Mt. i. 16 implied the Virgin Birth, but
it was stated from the unique point of view reflected in the
Genealogy itself.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(4) <hi rend='italic'>The text was liable to misunderstanding, and the history of
the textual variants is the history of that misunderstanding.</hi>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. The Historical Question: Its Limits And
Bearings</head>

<p>
Our purpose in the final chapter is to co-ordinate the results
we have reached, and to discuss their bearing upon the historical
question of the Virgin Birth. We have also to determine how
far strictly historical considerations can take us; to ask, that is
to say, within what limits the problem is historical at all. It
will be well first to summarize the conclusions to which we have
already come.
</p>

<p>
(1) The Virgin Birth was not the subject of Apostolic preaching,
and apparently was unknown to St. Paul and St. Mark.
</p>

<p>
(2) St. Luke became acquainted with the tradition for the first
time, either when he was in process of writing his Gospel, or
immediately afterwards.
</p>

<p>
(3) The First Gospel presupposes the Virgin Birth tradition,
which had probably been known to its readers for some time,
sufficiently long for problems to be started and for difficulties to
be raised.
</p>

<p>
(4) No satisfactory proof is forthcoming to show that the
Fourth Evangelist definitely rejected the tradition. The most
we can say is that his doctrinal sympathies lay in another
direction.
</p>

<p>
On the positive side our most important result is that we can
prove from the New Testament itself that belief in the Virgin
Birth existed in influential Christian communities at the time
when the First and Third Gospels were written. We have no
further need, therefore, to consider theories which assign the
belief to a later age, and which, by various interpolation-hypotheses,
deprive the doctrine of New Testament support.
Those who have stated such theories have rendered service in
that they have explored an alternative path. On the view we
have preferred this path proves to be a cul-de-sac. We have
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
therefore, to recognize that, whether we accept or reject the
Virgin Birth, we must do this in full acknowledgement of the fact
that among early witnesses to the belief are two outstanding
New Testament Writings.
</p>

<p>
Can we go further than this? To do so we must consider the
First and Third Gospels, in respect of their mutual relations and
of what they conjointly imply.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. The Virgin Birth in the First and Third Gospels</head>

<p>
In considering the relation in which the First and Third
Gospels stand to each other and to the Virgin Birth three
questions are of the greatest interest and importance. (1) <hi rend='italic'>To
what extent do the two Gospels imply a common tradition and
belief?</hi> (2) <hi rend='italic'>How far back can we trace this tradition?</hi> (3) <hi rend='italic'>In
what relation does the public tradition stand to the theory of an
earlier tradition of a private and restricted character?</hi>
</p>

<p>
(1) In answer to the first question, our view is that <hi rend='italic'>each Gospel,
in a different way, is a witness to the same tradition</hi>. Too much
has frequently been made of the theory that in Mt. and Lk. we
have two independent accounts of the Virgin Birth tradition. It
may seriously be questioned if this theory is true. Mt. i. 18-25
is misunderstood if it is explained as a Virgin Birth tradition.
Like the rest of cc. i, ii, its character is Midrashic, and it is
written from an apologetic standpoint. It would therefore be
much truer to say that it <emph>implies</emph> the existence of a Virgin Birth
tradition as known to the readers of the Gospel. What form
that tradition took we are of course unable to say. It is possible
that it was similar to the tradition as it appears in Lk. On the
other hand, it may be that even in Lk. the form in which the
tradition is presented owes something to the Evangelist's craftsmanship.
If this is so, it would seem that the narratives of both
writers point back to a simpler tradition or belief, from which, in
different ways, they came to assume their present form. What
is of chief importance is the view that in both Gospels we have,
not so much two independent narratives of the Virgin Birth, as
rather two independent witnesses to what originally was one and
the same tradition.
</p>

<p>
It cannot escape our notice that, in spite of their obvious
differences, Lk. i. 34 f. and Mt. i. 18-25 contain what is substantially
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
the same statement, a statement which in each passage
is central. In Mt. i. 20 we read: <q><hi rend='italic'>That which is conceived</hi> (τὸ ...
γεννηθέν) <hi rend='italic'>in her is of the Holy Spirit</hi></q>; and in Lk. i. 35, after the
reference to the Holy Spirit, we read: <q><hi rend='italic'>That which is to be born</hi>
(τὸ γεννώμενον) <hi rend='italic'>shall be called holy, the Son of God</hi></q>. There is
much to be said for the view that both expressions point back
to a common original, to a primitive belief that Jesus was <q>born
of the Holy Spirit</q> (cf. Harnack, <hi rend='italic'>Date of Acts</hi>, &amp;c., pp. 142 ff.).
</p>

<p>
If then we are unable to accept the view that in Mt. and Lk.
we have two independent accounts of the Virgin Birth, we may
well ask if the loss is a real one. It is probably nothing of the
kind. There was indeed a certain advantage in feeling able to
point to two diverse traditions which converged upon one fact.
Nevertheless, the argument always had a certain weakness. We
had to account for the two different traditions, and the explanation
was a theory we could never prove. It may be that St.
Luke's story goes back for its authority to Mary; it is very
doubtful if St. <q>Matthew's</q> has any historical connexion with
Joseph; but in either case neither assumption is justifiable in
an historical inquiry. It must be allowed, we think, that our view
has sounder advantages. Instead of claiming validity for two
diverse traditions, we can point to two very different narratives,
which arise out of the same belief and are independent witnesses
to its existence in the primitive Christian community.
</p>

<p>
(2) <hi rend='italic'>To what point, then, can we trace this tradition?</hi>
</p>

<p>
We have argued that the Virgin Birth tradition first began to
gain currency in the circles in which St. Luke moved at the time
when the Third Gospel was being written. We have also seen
that the tradition was already known to the readers of the First
Gospel. If these conclusions are valid, it is evident that the
relative order in which the two Gospels were written will determine
the farthest point to which we can trace the Virgin Birth
tradition as publicly known. What, then, is the order of composition
in the case of Mt. and Lk.?
</p>

<p>
We may frankly admit that if priority must be assigned to
Mt., it becomes difficult to understand how St. Luke could have
no knowledge of the Virgin Birth at the time when he first took
up his pen. For, on this view, we ask, Must not the tradition
have already reached the circles in which he was moving at the
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
time? It would certainly be more favourable to our theory if
we could assign priority to the Third Gospel. In this case we
should have a very simple account to give of the history of the
tradition. We should discover it emerging for the first time in
St. Luke's Gospel, and we should have a ready explanation (in
the fact of the interval between the two works) for the apologetic
note in the later Gospel.
</p>

<p>
But the priority of the two Gospels is not a question to be
decided simply by the attitude which the Evangelists display
towards the Virgin Birth. Mt. and Lk. must be compared
throughout. When this is done there do not appear to be
sufficient grounds for giving a vote in either direction (cf. Stanton,
GHD., ii, p. 368). All that we can say is that the two Gospels
are independent works, and must have been written about the
same time. If there was an interval, it cannot have been great,
for there are no sufficient signs that either writer was acquainted
with the work of the other. It is especially difficult to think
that St. Luke would have neglected the First Gospel, if it had
been accessible to him (cf. Lk. i. 1-4).
</p>

<p>
If, however, we accept, as a working hypothesis, the view that
the two Gospels were written independently of each other, and
more or less simultaneously,<note place='foot'>Cf. Jülicher, INT. (Eng. Tr.), p. 367: <q>In my opinion, both took up their
pens more or less simultaneously, each unaware of the other's work, and both
actuated essentially by the same motive, i.e. that of bestowing a Gospel upon
the Church which should be at once complete, and well adapted both to
refute unjust accusations from outside and to edify the believers themselves.</q></note> it will still follow that the Virgin
Birth tradition was already known in at least one influential
primitive Christian community (that to which the First Gospel
was addressed) while it was unknown to St. Luke.<note place='foot'>This appears in the fact that the First Gospel implies, as we have seen,
that the doctrine had already been known to its readers for some time.</note> Is this
a fatal objection, or does such a position represent what may
well have been the actual situation? We do not think that the
difficulty is too great.
</p>

<p>
The tides by which traditions flow in different places are not
simultaneous; they differ in time, in height, and in volume. No
practice could be more mischievous than the habit of dating the
relative spread of early beliefs simply by the dates of contemporary
documents. Regard must be paid to local conditions.
</p>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<p>
In life as in nature there are variations of current and of coast
formation. There are limits, of course, within which this caveat
holds good; but, provided the interval of time is not too great,
the view that St. Luke could begin to write in ignorance of
a tradition already known elsewhere is not self-condemned.
After all, St. Luke himself had access to much tradition which
presumably was unknown to the First Evangelist (witness St.
Luke's special matter).
</p>

<p>
Concerning the length of time we can allow the Virgin Birth
tradition to have been already known elsewhere, when St. Luke
began to write, there is room for difference of opinion. If, as we
have contended, he became acquainted with it in the process of
writing or immediately afterwards, the period can scarcely have
been considerable. Perhaps it ought to be estimated in months
rather than in years, but to say more would be idle speculation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The farthest point therefore to which we can trace the existence
of the Virgin Birth as a public tradition is some little time previous
to the composition of the Third Gospel.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(3) It is a perfectly fair assumption to make that the public
tradition must have had a <emph>private</emph> vogue before, and perhaps for
some time before, it became public property. This view becomes
especially probable in the light of what we have just seen, viz.
that the spread of the public tradition among the primitive
Christian communities covered an appreciable period of time.
The question of the historical truth of the Virgin Birth is precisely
the question of how far back the private tradition can be
traced; whether it can go back to Mary the mother of Jesus,
and whether satisfactory reasons can be given for a silence which
extends beyond the period covered by the Pauline Epistles and
the Second Gospel, and is broken only at last in the interval
which shortly preceded the composition of the Gospels of Mt.
and Lk. In this lies the real historical problem. <hi rend='italic'>Can the theory
of a private authoritative tradition be vindicated?</hi> There are
several questions which bear upon this problem. They are:
(1) The question of the date of the First and of the Third
Gospels; (2) The extent to which the credibility of the Gospels
permits of the possibility of error; (3) The Alternative Theories
of the origin of belief in the Virgin Birth; (4) The theological
aspect of the tradition.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Date of the Gospels in Relation to the Virgin Birth Tradition</head>

<p>
The relation in which the question of <hi rend='italic'>the Date of the Gospels</hi>
stands to the results reached is sufficiently clear. If we could
fix the time when Mt. and Lk. were written, we could determine
within comparatively narrow limits when the Virgin Birth tradition
first gained currency. A conclusion upon this point would
materially affect our estimate of the historical value of the
tradition.
</p>

<p>
Until this stage we have deliberately refrained from assigning
dates to the Gospels. The only things we have assumed are the
priority of Mk. and the practically contemporaneous origin of
Mt. and Lk. Our justification for this course lies in the great
variety of opinion which exists on the question of date, and hence
the desirability of keeping clear, as long as we can, from considerations
which must vitally affect the results secured.
</p>

<p>
Unfortunately, as we have said, no sort of unanimity exists
upon the question of the date of the Gospels. A glance at the
extremely useful table which Dr. Moffatt prints on page 213 of
his Introduction makes this clear. At first sight the position
would appear chaotic, and we might well shrink from attempting
to connect our results with specific dates. It is impossible,
moreover, in a work like the present, to discuss the question in
detail. Such a problem ought to be considered independently,
and with regard to all the facts of the case. It would seem best
therefore to ask what the consequences are, if we incline to any
one of certain representative dates. We are at liberty, of course,
to indicate our personal preferences, but, for the reasons stated,
we shall have to agree to a measure of uncertainty. This is disappointing,
but the responsibility must lie at the right door, and
that door is the present failure of Biblical Scholarship to arrive
at a consensus of opinion on the question of the date of the
Gospels. Perfect agreement there will never be, but until there is
substantial agreement every historical investigation into questions
of New Testament origins must prove incomplete.
</p>

<p>
The problem of the date of the Gospels is not, however, so
chaotic as might at first sight appear. There is a strongly marked
disposition to recede from the extremes on both sides, and there
is a very considerable agreement that the period from 60 to
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
100 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> covers the time during which the Synoptic Gospels
were written. There is also a consensus of opinion that the
Second Gospel cannot have been written later than about 70 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
Every decade, and almost every year, however, between 60 and
100 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> finds advocates for the composition of Mt. and Lk.
There are, nevertheless, three periods which find special favour.
These may be briefly mentioned.
</p>

<p>
(1) The first period we may note is the closing years of the
first century. For this view the main arguments are (i) the
supposed dependence of St. Luke upon Josephus, and (ii) the
ecclesiastical tone of certain passages in the First Gospel.
</p>

<p>
(2) A second view brings both Mk. and Lk. within St. Paul's
lifetime, and dates Mt. shortly after the fall of Jerusalem. This
is the opinion of Harnack (<hi rend='italic'>Date of Acts and of the Synoptic
Gospels</hi>). It has not won a large following, either in Germany
or in this country, but it is probably nearer the truth than the
previous view.
</p>

<p>
(3) A third period is the time about 80 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> One advantage
of this view, as Dr. Plummer candidly admits (ICC., St. Lk.,
p. xxxi), is the fact that it avoids the difficulties which beset the
other two. The main argument which commends it to Dr.
Plummer is that <q>such a date allows sufficient time for the
<q>many</q> to <q>draw up narratives</q> respecting the acts and sayings
of Christ</q>.
</p>

<p>
It remains for us to indicate what bearing these representative
dates have upon the Virgin Birth tradition in the light of our
results.
</p>

<p>
It is clear that if we must date Mt. and Lk. in the closing
years of the first century, the historical value of the tradition is
reduced to a minimum. For, if that tradition is historical, we
are compelled to assume that for a period of about ninety years
the story was jealously guarded, first by Mary herself and then
by a chosen few to whom it was revealed. But who will believe
this? If we accept Harnack's dates, then the period about
60 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> will be the time when belief in the Virgin Birth first
began to spread. While, if we prefer the third alternative, we
must fix upon a time some fifteen to twenty years later, i.e. the
period from 75 to 80 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
</p>

<p>
It is evident that the case for the historical truth of the tradition
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
is at its strongest if Harnack's dates can be accepted. Looking
at the question from the sole standpoint of the time-interval, we
do not believe that the third period is impossibly late. However
we look at the question, we are unable to bring the public tradition
within the lifetime of Mary. But, provided we are not
compelled to date the Gospels at the close of the century, there
do not seem to be insuperable difficulties&mdash;so far as the time-element
is concerned&mdash;against connecting that public tradition
with those who were near her person.
</p>

<p>
It will be seen that the question of the date of the Gospels is
an important one. The utmost, however, we are able to glean in
this field is a somewhat negative advantage. Our conclusion is
that no insuperable difficulty stands in the way. Obviously, the
onus of proof yet remains. The long period of silence must be
explained, and the truth of the tradition vindicated.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Relation of the Question of the Historical Value of the Gospels to the Problem</head>

<p>
We must next briefly consider the question of <hi rend='italic'>the historical
value of the Synoptic Gospels</hi>, so far as it bears upon our immediate
problem. It is right to urge that our first aim must be to examine
the Virgin Birth tradition without bias or presuppositions of any
kind. But it is no less true to say that our estimate of the credibility
of the Gospels as a whole must react upon that task in the
end. Whether the Synoptic Gospels are but a tissue of legends,
or whether they fulfil a good standard of historical value, are
questions which cannot be ignored.
</p>

<p>
For those who claim infallibility, as well as inspiration, for the
Evangelists, the problem is at an end: Lk. and Mt. teach the
Virgin Birth; the doctrine is therefore true! But for most
people to-day that short and easy path is impossible. The
Gospels do not claim infallibility, and their contents do not
bespeak it. There can be no question that a trained observer of
to-day would have described many incidents in the life of Jesus
very differently. There are parables which have been unconsciously
hardened into miracles, sayings of Jesus which have been
misunderstood, stories which have grown amidst the exigencies
of controversy and in the process of evangelization. These things
are no more than we might expect. They were inevitable;
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
unless we credit the Evangelists with a mechanical preservation
from error which finds no justification beyond our own preconceived
notions of what a Gospel ought to be. Nor do such
admissions rob the Gospels of real worth. On the contrary, they
throw their historical value into strong relief. For to perceive
that the natural infirmities of the human mind have left their
trace upon the Evangelic Records is only to prepare the way for
us to recognize how close in the main the Evangelists have kept
to the real facts of history. The significant fact is not that they
have made mistakes, but that they have made so few that are of
real importance. We have only to compare their work with the
Apocryphal Gospels to see, in the case of the Evangelists, what
restraint the solid facts of history exercised upon the natural
tendencies of their minds. Jülicher, who does not hesitate to say
that what the Evangelists relate is <q>a mixture of truth and
poetry</q> (INT., Eng. Tr., p. 368), nevertheless declares that <q>the
Synoptic Gospels are of priceless value, not only as books of
religious edification, but also as authorities for the history of
Jesus</q> (ib., p. 371). <q>The true merit of the Synoptists</q>, he says,
<q>is that, in spite of the poetic touches they employ, they did not
repaint, but only handed on, the Christ of history</q>'
</p>

<p>
What bearing has such an estimate of the Gospels upon the
historic truth of the Virgin Birth tradition? Obviously, it does
not save us from the trouble of testing the tradition by such tests
as we can apply. That the tradition has found a place in the
New Testament is not in itself a certificate of truth. The
Evangelists certainly believed the tradition; they were intellectually
honest; but they may have been mistaken. The ultimate
question is the truth of the authorities upon which they rested
and of the belief they reflect. Their importance as writers is
that they countersign the tradition with the high authority they
possess. But, however high their authority, it is not that of
infallibility. The truth of the Gospels is the truth of their
sources. As regards the Virgin Birth tradition, the sources
cannot be traced back to Mk. and Q, the two primary Synoptic
documents, but to the later tradition of the Christian Church, at
the time when Mt. and Lk. were written. The First and Third
Evangelists have endorsed that tradition; the problem of the
Virgin Birth is whether they were right. Nothing that we have
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
said in this section must be construed to prejudge that question.
That the Evangelists have accepted the tradition, for us unquestionably
gives it a higher value; but it is not a determinative
value. The main result is to make yet clearer the final issue,
which is, we repeat, whether the story which the Evangelists
endorse can be traced back to an authoritative source. Has it
the sanction of Mary or of those who may be supposed to have
known her mind?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Question of Alternative Theories</head>

<p>
In many discussions of the Virgin Birth, the question of
<hi rend='italic'>Alternative Theories</hi> occupies a prominent place. Our purpose
in the present section is to ask what place it may legitimately be
given. Has it the importance which is often claimed?
</p>

<p>
Attention has frequently been called to the inability of those
who reject the Virgin Birth to agree upon an alternative theory.
The failure is patent. Harnack and Lobstein, on the one side,
plead for a Jewish-Christian origin for the doctrine, in which the
influence of Isa. vii. 14 played a decisive part; on the other side,
Soltau, Schmiedel, Usener, and others, trace the tradition to the
effect of non-Christian myths. Not only so; the advocates of
each theory specifically reject the other. Lobstein, for example,
thinks that <q>it would be rash to see direct imitations or positive
influences</q> in the analogies <q>between the Biblical myth and
legends of Greek or Eastern origin</q>. While there was mutual
action between the worship or doctrine of paganism and advancing
Christianity, <q>nothing warrants historical criticism in considering
the tradition of the miraculous birth of Christ as merely the outcome
of elements foreign to the religion of Biblical revelation</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Birth of Christ</hi>, p. 76). Schmiedel, on the other
hand, rejects the Jewish-Christian origin of the tradition, <q>Nor
would Isa. vii. 14 have been sufficient to account for the origin of
such a doctrine unless the doctrine had commended itself on its
own merits. The passage was adduced only as an afterthought,
in confirmation.... Thus the origin of the idea of a virgin birth
is to be sought in Gentile-Christian circles</q> (EB., col. 2963 f.).<note place='foot'>Cf. Usener to the same effect, EB., col. 3351.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is not strange, perhaps, that some writers have pressed these
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
contradictions into the service of Apologetics. Thus, for example,
Dr. Orr does not scruple to say: <q>As in the trial of Jesus before
the Sanhedrim, <q>neither so did their witness agree together</q></q>
(op. cit., p. 152). He even presents the remarkable argument
that Dr. Cheyne's theory <q>gives the death-stroke to all the
theories that have gone before it</q>, and yet is itself <q>absolutely
baseless</q> (ib., p. 178). Sweet's argument is more cautiously
introduced. He recognizes that the contention has its limits.
He instances Bossuet's argument against the Reformation drawn
from the Variations of Protestantism and G. H. Lewes's inference
from the History of Philosophy that philosophy is impossible
(op. cit., p. 299). But, having said this, Sweet argues that the
critics agree in nothing <q>save dislike and depreciation of the
documents</q>, and that <q>their theories are mutually destructive</q>.
</p>

<p>
It appears to us that this line of argument is open to serious
objection; it is unfair, and it is unwise.
</p>

<p>
It is unfair, because it is neither uncommon nor unreasonable
to find men agreed in rejecting a tradition or belief, and yet at
variance in respect of theories of origin. It is one thing to say
that a belief is untrue; quite another thing to account for its
existence. That men agree upon the one point is more significant
than that they differ upon the other. The view we have mentioned
is unwise, because its triumph may be short-lived. There
is always room for the emergence of a better alternative theory,
which shall combine the excellences, and avoid the weaknesses,
of pioneer attempts.
</p>

<p>
It does not need a prophet to suggest that the next alternative
theory will be psychological and eclectic. If the tradition is not
historical, it is not likely that we can account for its rise by one
factor alone. We may regard it as established that prophecy
alone did not create the tradition, and that it was not invented
on the analogy of non-Christian myths. Nevertheless, it may be
that Isa. vii. 14, together with the idea that underlies non-Christian
legends, played an important part in the formation of the Christian
tradition. If the tradition is not historical, its ultimate origin
must be sought in the overwhelming impression which Jesus left
upon believing hearts and minds; in the conviction that from the
time of His Birth, and not only at His Baptism and Resurrection,
Jesus Christ was the Son of God by the anointing of the Holy
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
Spirit. The presumption that His Birth must have been remarkable
would be strengthened by the Old Testament stories of the
birth of Isaac, of Samson, and of Samuel, and especially by the
tradition which already had gathered round the birth of John.
It may also have been stimulated by the belief, found the whole
world over, that the origin of great men is supernatural and
miraculous. Even amongst the Jews the idea was present, that
the Messiah's origin would be strange, and that no man would
know from whence he came (Jn. vii. 27). If there is reason to
presuppose such a point of view, we can easily imagine the
electric effect which such a passage as Isa. vii. 14 would have
upon those who studied Old Testament prophecies in the light
of their experience of Jesus. It is vain to object that it is only
in the LXX that this connexion could be established, and that
in the Hebrew the word rendered <q>virgin</q> means a young woman
of marriageable age. The First Gospel (i. 23) shows that it was
the LXX rendering which was already read, and doubtless preferred,
in the primitive Christian community. Still more fatuous
is it to say, as it has been said again and again, that no Jew ever
interpreted Isa. vii. 14 of the Messiah. As well might we say of
other passages that no Jew would have interpreted them Messianically!
The question is not how Jews regarded Isa. vii. 14, but
how it may have appeared in the eyes of Jews who had come
under the spell of Jesus. The passage cannot have created belief
in the Virgin Birth, but it could have crystallized a belief for
which wonder and speculation had prepared the way. <q>So it
must have been!</q> men could well have argued. On this supposition
the belief antedated the tradition. But that beliefs have
created traditions again and again is enough to show that it
could have been so here. Nor is the time-element the insuperable
difficulty it has been supposed to be. The idea that a myth
would require fifty years to grow is absurd.<note place='foot'>Cf. Loofs, <hi rend='italic'>What is the Truth about Jesus Christ?</hi>, p. 92 f.: <q>Legends
arise much more quickly than is assumed by liberal theology since Strauss</q>.</note> Provided the
parents of Jesus were already dead, the myth could have sprung
up new born.
</p>

<p>
In sketching the foregoing theory our purpose is not to assert
its truth, but rather to illustrate its by no means inherent
improbability. It could be true; or, at any rate, this judgement
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
might any day have to be passed upon some alternative theory,
superior to any that has yet been stated. The agreement of the
Virgin Birth tradition with historic fact may be the true solution
of the problem, but it is not the only solution that is possible,
nor can its superiority be established by the comparative method
alone. We therefore work along wrong lines if we attempt to
argue the historic character of the Virgin Birth tradition by
dwelling upon the incongruities and contradictions of alternative
theories. The baleful attractiveness of such a method ought
strenuously to be resisted. It may yield a few showy triumphs,
but few, if any, solid results. Of course, if we have first satisfied
ourselves that the Virgin Birth is historically true, the practice is
less objectionable; but it is doubtful if even then it adds much to
results otherwise obtained. To include the method in the process
of proof is to build upon sand.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, this view is equally sound, if our solution
of the problem is one of the alternative theories to which we have
referred. We have sketched a theory which we have claimed
might be true. But what more could be claimed by the comparative
method? Its justification or lack of justification lies
elsewhere. The possible may not be the probable, nor the
probable the true. The importance of the question we have discussed
in the present section is that it reveals what are the
by-paths and what is the high-road of a true investigation. The
question of alternative theories is purely secondary. The high-road
is where we left it at the end of Section II. Can the tradition,
endorsed by the First and Third Evangelists, be vindicated?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Doctrinal Considerations</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The ultimate considerations which determine a true estimate of
the Virgin Birth tradition are doctrinal.</hi> It is one of the chief
merits of Lobstein's well-known book that he so clearly recognizes
this fact: <q>What must finally turn the scale ... are reasons
of a dogmatic and religious order</q> (op. cit., p. 79).
</p>

<p>
We need make no apology for not having dealt with the
question of the possibility of the Miraculous Birth from the
standpoint of Science. We do not propose to consider the question
at length even now. The objection that miracles are impossible
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
has long been exploded. In a famous letter to the <hi rend='italic'>Spectator</hi>
(February 10, 1866) Huxley wrote: <q>... denying the possibility
of miracles seems to me quite as unjustifiable as speculative
Atheism</q>, and Atheism, he said, is <q>as absurd, logically speaking,
as polytheism</q>. What we call a <q>miracle</q> may be no more than
the divine operation within the domain of law itself. We have therefore
no ground for saying that a virgin birth is impossible; while,
in the case of One so unique as Jesus Christ, such an assertion would
be utterly absurd. We do not really need any support which may
be gained from the question of Parthenogenesis. The question
is in the first place one of evidence.
</p>

<p>
But if primarily the question is one of evidence, it does not
stop there. The historical and the theological aspects of the
problem overlap; we cannot determine the question by weighing
evidence alone.
</p>

<p>
If we attempt to confine ourselves to a purely historical inquiry,
the verdict must be <q>Not proven</q>.<note place='foot'>So Prof. Percy Gardner, quoted in <hi rend='italic'>Faith and Freedom</hi>, p. 168.</note> It is true, on the one hand,
that the late appearance of the tradition is not an insuperable
difficulty. The theory of a long-treasured secret has a logic of
its own. On the other hand, by the conditions of the case, we
are unable to interrogate the witnesses. We cannot ask them
whence they derived what they tell us. We cannot demonstrate
that the story they relate has the ultimate authority of Mary.
All that we can reach is a primitive belief, generally accepted
within New Testament times, which presumably implies an earlier
private tradition. Beyond that point we cannot travel&mdash;within
the limits of the evidence alone.
</p>

<p>
Substantially this position is recognized by Dr. Gore in
<hi rend='italic'>Dissertations</hi>. While affirming his belief that the historical
evidence is <q>in itself strong and cogent</q>, he says frankly that <q>it
is not such as to compel belief</q>. <q>There are ways to dissolve its
force</q>, he continues. The last sentence is not very happily
phrased, but it need not detain us. The point that is of greatest
importance is expressed by Dr. Gore as follows:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>... to produce belief there is needed&mdash;in this as in almost all
other questions of historical fact&mdash;besides cogent evidence, also
a perception of the meaning and naturalness, under the circumstances,
of the event to which evidence is borne. To clinch the
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
historical evidence for our Lord's Virgin Birth there is needed
the sense that, being what He was, His human birth could hardly
have been otherwise than is implied in the Virginity of His
mother</q> (ib., p. 64).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The present work is, in part, a foot-note to, or illustration of,
this principle. We may therefore be pardoned for a further
reference to it in a passage from F. C. Burkitt's <hi rend='italic'>Gospel History
and its Transmission</hi>, in which it finds an almost classic statement:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Our belief or disbelief in most of the Articles in the Apostles'
Creed does not ultimately rest on historical criticism of the
Gospels, but upon the general view of the universe, of the order
of things, which our training and environment, or our inner experience,
has led us severally to take. The Birth of our Lord
from a virgin and His Resurrection from the dead&mdash;to name the
most obvious Articles of the Creed&mdash;are not matters which
historical criticism can establish</q> (p. 350 f.).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is clear, then, that if further advance is to be made, we must
enter the realms of doctrine. What doctrinal purpose, we must
ask, does the Virgin Birth serve? Does it explain the sinlessness
of Jesus? Is it necessary to the doctrine of the Incarnation? Is
it congruous with the doctrine of the Person of Christ? It is not
contended that an answer to these questions in the affirmative
would prove the event to have happened. Nevertheless, such an
answer would unquestionably invest the New Testament tradition
with a yet higher probability, sufficiently great, in our judgement,
to make belief in its historical character reasonable. If, however,
we have to answer the doctrinal questions in the negative, then
the historical character of the tradition receives a fatal blow.
The opinion, so frequently expressed, that, in any case, the Virgin
Birth is not a doctrine of essential importance, is one that calls
for scrutiny. If it means that a man may be a sincere follower
of our Lord, whether he believes the doctrine or not, it is, of
course, a truism. But if it means that the doctrine is of no
importance in relation to the Incarnation and the Person of
Christ, that is perhaps the strongest argument that can be
adduced <emph>against</emph> the credibility of the miracle. What is doctrinally
irrelevant is not likely to be historically true.
</p>

<p>
It does not fall in with the scope of this work to enter fully
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
into the theological question. Our purpose has been to examine
the historical and critical questions and to show where the real
problem lies. Criticism cannot solve that problem. Nevertheless,
its contribution is not barren. It can discuss interpolation
theories; it can treat of the literary form which the tradition has
assumed in the Gospels. It can date&mdash;imperfectly it is true&mdash;the
time when the belief became current. It can apply broad
tests of credibility. We ourselves believe that it can say the
miracle may have transpired. But it cannot say more. The
last word is with Theology.
</p>

<p>
On the theological side, the question is probably more far-reaching
than is commonly supposed. Individual Christian
doctrines can never be treated <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in vacuo</foreign>; they are inter-related
one with another. It is often said that those who reject the
Virgin Birth reject also the physical Resurrection of Jesus, the
Ascension, and many of the miracles reported in the Gospels.
The statement is largely true; it is possible we ought also to
include in it the doctrine of the Pre-existence of Christ. The
reason is that these denials belong to the same general habit of
mind; they are part of the content of what has been called
a <q>reduced Christianity</q>. It is impossible, therefore, adequately
to discuss the question of the Virgin Birth on its theological side,
without raising the larger question, whether this so-called
<q>reduced Christianity</q> is not the true faith, as distinguished from
a <q>full Christianity</q> which in reality is florid and overgrown.
Sweet can scarcely be said to go too far when he writes: <q>In
short, and this is the gist of the whole matter, in this controversy
concerning the birth of Christ, two fundamentally different
Christologies are groping for supremacy</q> (ib., p. 311). This fact
has not always been recognized by those who think of the Virgin
Birth, but there can be no question of its truth. The Virgin
Birth is part of a larger problem; it must ultimately be established,
if at all, as a corollary, not as an independent conclusion.
The larger problem is whether we can still hold the Trinitarian
Theology and the Two-Nature Doctrine of the Person of Christ,
or whether we must give to the Immanence of God a place
greatly in excess of any it has yet held in Christian thought;
whether, indeed, we can feel it adequate to speak of Christ as
One in whom the Immanent God revealed and expressed Himself
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
in an altogether unique and ultimately inexplicable way. In
any case, the conflict is one of Christologies. The purely naturalistic
interpretation of Jesus holds a more and more precarious
place in the field. This, then, is the problem of the present and
of the immediate future. It is nothing less than the problem
which every age has had to face since the days of Jesus of
Nazareth&mdash;the problem of the Incarnation.
</p>

<p>
The present writer takes no shame to say that upon the
theological aspect of the Virgin Birth he has not yet been able
to satisfy his mind. The longer the question is studied the less
easy it becomes airily to brush the miracle aside and call it
myth. We speak of those who are impressed by the unique
spiritual greatness of Jesus, and who cannot explain for themselves
His Person in terms of humanity alone. The hesitation
does not spring from vacillation, nor, we hope, from lack of
courage and strength of mind. It springs out of a sense of the
uniqueness of Jesus. Have we adequately grasped His greatness?
Can we say what is, or what is not, congruous with His
Person? It is open to serious question whether the individual
can expect, or ought to expect an answer to these questions out
of his experience and thought alone. Brief discussions of the
Virgin Birth by individual writers do not carry us very far.
What is needed more than anything else is a yet fuller disclosure
of the unfettered mind of the Christian Church; and for this we
must wait.
</p>

<p>
This last statement may perhaps seem strange. Has not the
Church already expressed her corporate mind? Has she not
committed herself to the Virgin Birth tradition? Can we not
find it in Ignatius, in Justin, and in the Creeds of the Undivided
Church? That these things are so is too patent to be denied.
But has the Church expressed her <emph>unfettered</emph> mind? Has she
said her final word? Has she, indeed, ever been in a position to
do these things? The appeal to the almost unbroken external
witness of the Catholic Church does not carry us so far as we
might think. Once the Gospels had attained canonical authority
the rest was a foregone conclusion. The status given to the
Gospels carried everything else with it, and the Church was no
longer free to judge. It is written, therefore it was so! Moreover,
the question of the Virgin Birth was largely overshadowed
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
in the struggle with Docetism. It is only in modern times that
a more intelligent attitude towards the Gospels permits the
Church freely to ponder the Virgin Birth tradition in the light
of her experience of Christ. We may cherish the hope that she
has yet greater things to say of Christ than any she has yet
uttered. It is in its relation to that voice that the Virgin Birth
will find its place.
</p>

<p>
Where, then, shall we look for this expression of corporate mind?
Not perhaps again in Consiliar Decrees, though who can say?
There is, however, a corporate mind that finds expression in the
affirmations of simple believers, and in the writings of Christian
thinkers the world over. The affirmations are neither the medley
nor the babel they are sometimes thought to be. There is no
colourless uniformity, but there is a real and growing unity,
a harmony in which varied voices blend. No one can survey
Christendom without seeing that everywhere denominational
walls become less and less forbidding, and that every year it is
more difficult to classify Christian thinkers under the prim labels
of exclusive schools. Thought is unbound, but it is not chaotic.
The thousand streams fall to the rivers which flow onward
towards the sea that is never full. Those only may be pessimistic
who cannot take long views. We may believe that the Spirit
will yet guide His Church into all the truth. The individual
thinker whose voice breaks the silence will ever be needed. Yet
his task is but a limited one; he too must listen. For unless,
beneath his affirmations, we hear the undertone of a corporate
faith and experience, his voice will be but the echo that rings
among the empty hills.
</p>

<p>
One thing is certain. Whatever the ultimate issue, it must be
gain, even if gain through loss. Whether it be historical or not,
the Virgin Birth tradition must always be full of beauty and of
truth.
</p>

<p>
If, on the one hand, the tradition is involved in the corporate
experience of Christ, if it is congruous with what He was and is,
then, admittedly, the gain is great. For this means increased
confidence in the facts which the Evangelists relate and the
primitive community believed: there is no breach with the past.
It means too another foothold in history for the theological interpretation
of the Person of Christ. And these are things not
lightly to be surrendered, save at the command of Truth.
</p>

<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>

<p>
If, on the other hand, the story is a legend of the Christian
Faith, that is not an end. Strangely enough, if the tradition is
not historical, it thereby becomes a valuable piece of Christian
apologetic. Who was this Jesus, we ask, of whom men dared to
believe that He was born of a virgin? The faded wreath is no
less the tribute of undying love. That Jewish Christians could
explain the unique divine personality of Jesus by the miracle of
a virgin birth is&mdash;if we must solve the problem so&mdash;the highest
tribute they could pay. If we find it hard to understand how
they could think of Him in this way, without the warrant of the
fact, it may be that our difficulty is just the measure of our
failure to grasp the wonder of their love. If, in the end, we
must call poetry what they called fact, it will not be because we
are strangers to their faith. They too were bound by the spell
of that Transcendent Face in which is the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index</head>

<lg>
<l>Acts, The, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allen, W. C., <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> n., <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> n., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n., <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> n., <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n., <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> n., <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105-14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocalypse, The, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argument from Silence, The, <ref target='Pg001'>1-3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, B. W., <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism of Jesus, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnard, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bethlehem, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bezae, Codex, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birthplace of Jesus, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> f., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blass, Friedrich, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bossuet, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Box, George H., <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> n., <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> n., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> n., <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burkitt, F. C., <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> n., <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> n., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n., <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> n., <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> n., <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n., <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> n., <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105-14</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpenter, J. Estlin, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> n., <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic Epistles, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cerinthus, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chase, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheyne, T. K., <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> n., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clemen, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conybeare, F. C., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corporate Mind of the Church, The, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creeds, The, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curetonian Syriac, The, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalman, G., <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Date of the Synoptic Gospels, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davidic Descent, The:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Acts, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Lk., <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Mt., <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davidson, A. B., <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dialogue of Timothy and Aquila</hi>, The, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Diatessaron</hi>, The, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysius of Corinth, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Docetism, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doctrinal Modifications, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drummond, James, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebionites, The, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphanius, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Expository Times</hi>, The, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairbairn, A. M., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Ferrar</q> Group, The, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First Gospel, The:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apologetic motive, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>characteristic words, &amp;c., <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> f., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> f., <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>genuineness of cc. i, ii, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of treatment, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotations, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> f., <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>source of Virgin Birth tradition, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>style, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> f., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity of cc. i, ii, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virgin Birth an original element, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fourth Gospel, The, <ref target='Pg015'>15-20</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardner, Percy, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genealogy in Lk., <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genealogy in Mt., <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnostics, The, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gore, Charles, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gould, Ezra P., <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> n., <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grill, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunkel, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Häcker, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harnack, Adolf, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> n., <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> n., <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> n., <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> n., <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> n., <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawkins, Sir John C., <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> n., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> n., <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> n., <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> n., <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headlam, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrews, The Epistle to, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> f., <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heffern, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>

<lg>
<l>Hilgenfeld, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hillmann, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Historical value of the Synoptic Gospels, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hobart, W. K., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holtzmann, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hort, F. J. A., <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huxley, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignatius, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incarnation, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inference, its place in the Gospels, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interpolations, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irenaeus, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews at Nazareth, The, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> f., <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Baptist, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> f., <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jülicher, Adolf, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> n., <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kattenbusch, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knowledge of Jesus, The, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knowling, R. J., <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lake, Kirsopp, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> n., <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewes, G. H., <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewis, Mrs., and Mrs. Gibson, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Linguistic Argument, The, its importance, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> f., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lobstein, Paul, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> n., <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loisy, Abbé Alfred, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loofs, Friedrich, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> n., <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackintosh, H. R., <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maclean, A. J., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary, the mother of Jesus, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> f., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> f., <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merx, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milligan, George, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracles, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> f., <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moffatt, James, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n., <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n., <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> n., <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n., <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> n., <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> n., <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> n., <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> n., <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> n., <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> n., <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> n., <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montefiore, C. G., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulton, James Hope, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> n., <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> n., <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> n., <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> n., <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> n., <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulton and Geden, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> n., <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulton and Milligan (VGT.), <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> n., <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> n., <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orr, James, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> n., <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Oxford Studies in the Synoptic Problem</hi>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> n., <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papias, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parthenogenesis, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pastoral Epistles, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peake, A. S., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pericope adulteriae</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Person of Christ, The, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfleiderer, Otto, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philip, daughters of, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plummer, A., <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n., <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> n., <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> f., <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> n., <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> n., <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pre-existence of Christ, The, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Protevangelium Iacobi</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Q, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> n., <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramsay, W. M., <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> n., <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resch, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection of Christ, The, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n., <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, J. Armitage, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanday, William, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> f., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> n., <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> n., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> n., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> n., <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref> n., <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanday and Headlam, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n., <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmidt, N., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmiedel, Paul W., <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> n., <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> n., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> f., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Science, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Ernest F., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Second Adam, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon, Prophecy of, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinaitic Syriac MS., <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105-14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinlessness of Jesus, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soltau, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spitta, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Luke:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>did he teach the Virgin Birth? <ref target='Pg048'>48-71</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his knowledge of the Virgin Birth tradition, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72-4</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> f., <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his revision of Lk. and Acts, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> n.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treatment of Mk., <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the richness of his vocabulary, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<lg>
<l>St. Mark's Gospel, <ref target='Pg008'>8-12</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>original ending, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Paul, <ref target='Pg003'>3-7</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanton, Vincent H., <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> n., <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweet, Louis Matthews, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> n., <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertullian, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Text of the Gospels in the Second Century, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> f., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Textual Problem of Mt. i. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thayer-Grimm, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> n., <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> n., <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophilus of Antioch, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Third Gospel, <ref target='Pg022'>22-47</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72-87</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birth tradition of Lk. i, ii, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>narratives of Lk. ii, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purport of the angelic announcement (i. 30-3), <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson, J. M., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n., <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n., <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinitarian Theology, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Usener, H., <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> n., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n., <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verbal Inspiration, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> f., <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgin Birth tradition:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alternative theories, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apologetic and spiritual value, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrinal aspects, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>earliest date of public tradition, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>historical problem, <ref target='Pg115'>115-33</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of a private tradition, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Völter, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weinel, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weiss, J., <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wellhausen, J., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wendland, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westcott, B. F., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n., <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westcott and Hort, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Western</q> Readings, <ref target='Pg024'>24-6</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32-4</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wise Men, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zacharias, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zahn, Theodor, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimmermann, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> f., <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: Obvious printer's errors have been corrected.]
</p>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
